Chapter 8: Monsters

In Adventurer Conqueror King, the term “monster” generally refers to any being other than the player characters. Monsters are listed in this chapter inx an encyclopedic format. Each monster has certain characteristics, which are defined below. Though each monster listing can be considered to represent the “average” specimen of a particular creature, the Judge can alter the abilities and power level of any creature to fit the situation. It is assumed that all monsters, except humans and demi-humans, have infravision of 60’. 

Monster Characteristics
The following terms are used to define the characteristics of monsters.
% In Lair: This indicates the percentage chance of encountering the monster in its lair. Monsters are usually present in greater numbers when encountered in their lair, and may have treasure appropriate to the type. 
Dungeon Encounter: This category details the typical encounter that will occur with this monster in a dungeon setting. Each entry will be listed as: [Collective Noun] (Number Encountered) / [Collective Noun] (Number Encountered)
EXAMPLE: The Dungeon Encounter listing for Orcs reads “Gang (2d4) / Lair (1 warband)”. 
Use the first collective noun (e.g., “gang”) and subsequent number encountered (“2d4”) for encounters outside of the creature’s lair. Use the second collective noun (“lair”) and subsequent number encountered (“1 warband”) for encounters inside the creature’s lair. The number encountered in the lair is usually a distinct number of monsters (such as “2d6”), but sometimes is based on the ranges encountered outside the lair (e.g., “1 warband”). The latter is common for monsters that have a clan or tribal structure. 
If the category has only one collective noun and range, it means the monster does not make a lair. If the category has “none” listed, it means that the monster will not be encountered in this setting unless placed there by the Judge for a special reason. Except as a reference to the number encountered, the collective noun has no game mechanical effect, and is merely to help the Judge envision and describe what has been encountered. 
Note that number encountered applies to combatant creatures of the standard type. Chiefs, bodyguards, or noncombatant monsters (juveniles, elderly, and sometimes females) do not count in this number. The text of the monster description should explain this in detail where it matters, but the Judge is always the final arbiter.
EXAMPLE: When a dungeon encounter with orcs occurs, the Judge first rolls 1d100 against the orc’s % In Lair 35%. He rolls a 17, meaning that the orcs have been encountered in their lair. A lair of orcs is defined as 1 warband. 1 warband is defined as 2d6 gangs. The Judge rolls 1d4 for the number of gangs and gets a 3. The entry indicates that gangs are 2d4 orcs each, so he rolls 2d4 for each of the 3 gangs and gets 5, 3, and 7. 15 orcs are encountered. The Judge now consults the text of the monster description. Here he sees that for every gang encountered, one orc champion is present, and that for every warband encountered, one orc sub-chieftain is present. He also notes that the lair is ruled by a chieftain and that females and young equal to 50% of the number of males each are present. These creatures are in addition to the number encountered, so the overall lair encounter will include 15 orcs, 1 chieftain, 1 sub-chieftain, 3 champions, 10 females, and 10 young.
Wilderness Encounter: This category details the typical encounter that will occur with this monster in a wilderness setting. The Wilderness Encounter listing is read the same as the Dungeon Encounter listing, above. Note that wilderness lairs are usually the same size as dungeon lairs, but occasionally can be much larger. Large-sized wilderness lairs are common for human, demi-human, and humanoid encounters. A large-sized wilderness lair is essentially an entire dungeon itself. 
Alignment: All monsters are chaotic, neutral, or lawful. Many monsters are either unintelligent or are simply unconcerned about law and chaos, and are considered neutral. 
Movement: There are two listings under this category. The first represents a number in feet per turn that a creature may move. The second value provided in parentheses represents the monster’s combat movement, which are in feet per round. If two different rates are given, the additional movement will relate to movement of a different type, which will be appropriate to the creature. Common movement types include flying or swimming.
Armor Class: In game terms, the AC of a monster means the same thing as a character’s AC. For monsters, this value reflects not only the creature’s general agility but also its natural armor, from tough hide, or a magical adjustment. A normal unarmored man has an AC 0 while a powerful red dragon has an AC 10. 
Hit Dice: This value is roughly equivalent to character level, but for monsters it always represents a number of hit points determined by this number of d8s. For example, a 2 HD monster will have 2d8 hit points. Sometimes a value is given as a “+” or “-“, in which case this number is added or subtracted from the total hit points rolled. A monster will always have a minimum of 1 hp. Hit dice also determine the attack throws of monsters and how many experience points the adventurers receive when the monster is killed. Refer to the Monster Attack Throws table in Chapter 6 and the Monster Experience Points table in Chapter 6.
Some monsters have asterisks next to their Hit Dice. Each asterisk indicates that the monster has one of the following special abilities: automatic damage, breath weapon, charm, energy drain, fear, gaze attack, immunity to normal weapons, immunity to morale checks, invisibility, paralysis, petrification, poison, regeneration, spell-casting, splitting or summoning other creatures, swallowing whole, and spell-like or other abilities of similar potency. These special abilities increase the XP earned for defeating the monster, as shown on the Monster Experience Points table in Chapter 6. 
Hit dice also are used to determine which dungeon level the monster will be found on. Monsters of 1 HD or less will most typically be found on the first dungeon level. Monsters of 2-3 HD will inhabit the second dungeon level. 4-5 HD monsters typically populate the third dungeon level, while 6-7 HD monsters populate the fourth. Monsters of 8-9 HD are found on dungeon level five, while monsters of 10 HD or more are typically found only on dungeon level six or deeper. When monsters are found on an atypical dungeon level their Number Encountered should be adjusted accordingly. 
Attacks: This listing describes how many attacks are available to a monster, per round, and the nature of the attacks. These will be listed in the same order as the appropriate damage in the damage listing. There are a number of special attacks that monsters can employ. The most common of these are explained in greater detail below. When a creature is noted to have one of these special attacks, the rules below will apply except where the monster description specifically states otherwise. 
Acid: Some monsters employ acid. When acid successfully hits, it does damage because it has made contact with flesh. Once contact is made, acid does not need to make any additional attack throws in order to continue doing damage in subsequent rounds (unless otherwise noted). Most acid can be removed by rinsing it off with water or other non-flammable liquids (e.g. beer or wine). The acid breath weapon employed by black dragons performs differently in that the acid does not remain active round to round, and damage is only suffered per attack. If armor is destroyed by acid, the character’s AC should be adjusted to reflect having no armor.
Charge: Any monsters may charge, as described in Chapter 6 under Movement. But certain monsters have natural weapons that are especially suitable for charging. These monsters deal double damage on a successful charge.
Charm: Some monsters are able to charm characters with powerful enchantments. Monstrous charms function differently than the spell charm person. The character receives a saving throw versus Spells, but if the character fails the saving throw, he is confused and passive. A character under the effect of a monster’s Charm attack cannot use spells or magic items, cannot make decisions, and will not defend himself against the monster’s attacks. If the monster and charmed character cannot communicate due to a language barrier or some other situation, the charmed character will act in the interest of the monster to protect it, even from his comrades. All charm effects have a duration, but if the monster is killed, the effects will disappear.
Continuing Damage: Some monsters have attacks that, once successful, continue to deal damage on subsequent rounds without requiring further attack throws. Examples include the constrictive attack of a giant snake, or if a character is swallowed by a giant monster. The monster’s description will indicate under what circumstances continuing damage will discontinue (usually upon the death of the creature).
Dive: Flying monsters with talons can make dive attacks. Opponents must be in open terrain for this attack to be effective. Like a charge, a dive attack deals double damage. If the monster hits with both of its talons, the monster may grab the creature struck. The creature struck must be smaller than the monster, and it can avoid being grabbed with a successful saving throw versus Paralysis. If the monster is much larger than the opponent, the Judge may impose a saving throw penalty of -4, -6, -8, or greater. Some monsters may be so large and powerful that they grab with no saving throw permitted. Once a creature has been grabbed, the monster can automatically inflict damage each round with no attack throw necessary until the creature escapes. Grabbed creatures are helpless until they escape. To escape, the grabbed creature must make a successful saving throw versus Paralysis. Grabbed creatures may be carried off. A creature that has been carried off will fall to earth if it escapes, if the monster releases it, or if the monster is killed. 
Energy Drain: Some monsters, especially undead, have an energy drain attack. An energy drain removes class levels from characters and Hit Dice from other monsters. No saving throw is permitted against an energy drain. The effect can only be reversed by the 7th level cleric ritual spell restoration or the 9th level mage ritual wish. When a character is drained of a level, he is reduced to the minimum experience points for his new level. All abilities, including hit points, saving throws, etc., are affected as appropriate for the character of the new, lower class level.
Magic Resistance: Some powerful creatures enjoy a partial immunity to spells and spell-like effects. When a creature with magic resistance is affected by a spell or spell-like effect, the creature may make a magic resistance throw. A roll of 1d20 equal to or greater than the listed magic resistance (MR) value for the creature means it ignores the spell or effect. The magic resistance throw is affected by the power of the caster. The listed value assumes a 7th level caster. The creature suffers a -1 penalty for each level of the caster greater than 7, but gains a +1 bonus for each level of the caster less than 7. For purposes of magic resistance, spell-like effects are all effects that duplicate a spell, or magical effects that are resisted with a saving throw versus Spells or Staffs & Wands (but excluding effects that do not duplicate a spell and are resisted with saving throws versus Poison & Death, Blast & Breath, or Paralysis or Petrification).  
Paralysis: When a character is paralyzed, he collapses and is incapable of any movement whatsoever, including speaking or casting spells. Characters remain conscious and aware of their surroundings. A saving throw versus Paralysis is allowed to avoid the effect. Paralyzed characters are very vulnerable to attack. No attack throw to hit them is required, and they may be slain in one round with any weapon by any unengaged character. The paralysis attack of most monsters lasts 2d4 turns. The cleric spell cure light wounds can negate the paralysis, but no hit points are healed when the spell is used in this way. 
Petrifying Gaze: A victim that meets a monster’s petrifying gaze is required to make a saving throw versus Petrification or turn to stone. Any opponents surprised by the monster will meet its gaze, as will those attacking it without averting their eyes or using a mirror. Combatants who attempt to fight the monster while averting their eyes suffer penalties of -4 on attack rolls and -2 to AC. 
It is safe to view a monster's reflection in a mirror or other reflective surface; anyone using a mirror to fight a monster suffers a penalty of -2 to attack and no penalty to AC. A monster with a petrifying gaze is not immune to its own gaze, and if its sees itself in a mirror it must succeed in a saving throw versus Petrification or turns itself to stone. Monsters with petrifying gazes instinctively avoid mirrors or other reflective surfaces, even drinking with their eyes closed, but if an attacker can manage to surprise the monster with a mirror it may (1-2 on 1d6) see its reflection.
Poison: Poisonous monsters are among the most dreaded that adventurers will face. A character exposed to the poison of a monster, unless otherwise noted, must immediately succeed in a saving throw versus Poison or be killed. The 4th level cleric spell neutralize poison can be used to restore the stricken character if cast within 10 rounds of the character’s death. 
Swallow Attack: Some monsters are capable of swallowing a character whole when their unmodified attack throw equals or exceeds certain target values. The target value will be noted in the monster’s description. Characters who are swallowed suffer the listed damage every round until they die, or until the monster is killed. Being swallowed may have other effects also noted in the monster’s listing. If a character who has been swallowed has a sharp weapon, he may attack the monster from inside its belly with an attack penalty of -4. Should a swallowed character die and remain in a monster’s belly for 6 turns, he has been irrecoverably digested and cannot benefit from restore life and limb. 
Trample: When a monster tramples, it stomps or throws its weight against an opponent to deal damage due to its immense bulk. A trample attack gains a +4 bonus to the attack throw if the opponent is human-sized or smaller. Any monster capable of this attack will do so 3/4 of the time (1-3 on a d4), and the remaining times will employ any other forms of attack available to it. Large numbers (20 or greater) of normal sized animals, such as a herd of cattle, may also attempt a trample attack. These kinds of trample attacks deal 1d20 points of damage.
Damage: Damage is listed in the same order as attacks, and is represented by a number and kind of die that should be rolled, just like weapon damage is rolled. Some monsters may in fact employ weapons. 
Save: Like characters, monsters have saving throws. Monsters have saving throws that are the equivalent of a particular class and class level. Usually, this is the fighter class, but it can be any class. Monsters that are unintelligent often save as a fighter of a level equal to one-half of the monster’s Hit Dice number, rounded up. The following abbreviations are used in the monster listings, and are followed by a number indicating which level of the class a monster saves as: Cleric, C; Fighter, F; Mage, M; Thief, T; Dwarven Vaultguard, D; Elven Spellsword, E.
Morale: When losing a battle, monsters must roll morale to see if they stay and fight or flee. The Judge will roll 2d6 according to the Morale Rolls rule in Chapter 6 and add the monster’s morale score to the total. Morale scores range from -6 (for a monster that never fights) to +4 (for a monster that never retreats and never surrenders). Monsters that never roll morale, such as mindless vermin, constructs, or controlled undead, have a listing of N/A (not applicable). 
Treasure Type: This listing refers to the Treasure Type of the monster. The Treasure Types are lettered from A to R, with TT A yielding the smallest hoards and TT R the largest. This letter is cross-referenced on the Treasure Type table in Chapter 9 to determine the treasure that is found in the lair of a monster.  Unless otherwise noted, these treasures are found only in the monster’s lair. See Random Treasure Generation in Chapter 9 for more details. 
XP: This abbreviation stands for experience points. It is the precalculated total for the monster, taking into account its HD and any special abilities. Note that if a monster has variable HD, this total reflects a monster with the lowest HD possible, and XP will need to be recalculated for more powerful monsters.

Monster Types
Monsters with similar characteristics are grouped into monster types. The monster types are animal, beastmen, construct, enchanted creature, fantastic creature, giant humanoid, humanoid, ooze, summoned creature, undead, and vermin. A creature can belong to multiple types. For instance, skeletons are undead constructs, while efreeti are enchanted summoned creatures. Monster type determines the effectiveness of various charm, detection, hold, protection, and sleep spells against the creature.

Animal
Animals are a type of monster that includes apes, rock baboons, bats, bears, boars, camels, cats, crocodiles, dogs, elephants, ferrets, fish, hawks, herd animals, horses, lizards, mules, octopuses, rats, rhinoceroses, shark, shrews, snakes, squids, toads, weasels, whales, wolves, and any other creatures of sub-human intelligence that occur in the real world. Giant animals are merely larger version of normal animals, and therefore part of this type. Prehistoric animals, such as cave bears, dinosaurs, mastodons, saber-toothed tigers, and titanothere are also animals. Charm animal, speak with animal, and related magic items only work on animals. They are also vulnerable to charm monster and hold monster spells.

Beastman
Beastmen are a special type of monster that were created through ancient magic by blending a humanoid with an animal or fantastic creature. Beastmen include bugbears, centaurs, gnolls, goblins, hobgoblins, kobolds, lizardmen, lycanthropes, mermen, minotaurs, ogres, orcs, trolls, and troglodytes. 

Construct
Constructs are a type of mindless, unliving monster that includes animated statues, gargoyles, golems, skeletons, and zombies. (Note that skeletons and zombies are undead constructs.) Because they are not truly alive, all constructs are immune to gas and poison. Further, they are unaffected by charm, sleep, or hold spells. All constructs are enchanted creatures for purposes of spells such as dispel evil and protection from evil.  

Enchanted Creature
Enchanted creatures are a special type of monster that can be kept at bay by protection from evil and destroyed or driven off by dispel evil.  All constructs, summoned creatures, and undead are enchanted creatures, as are lycanthropes, shadows, and other fantastic creatures that can only be harmed by magical weapons.

Fantastic Creature
Fantastic creatures are a type of monster characterized by magical powers, impossible combinations of body parts, or both, including basilisks, blink dogs, centaurs, chimera, cockatrice, demon boars, doppelgangers, dragons, dragon turtles, gorgons, griffons, harpies, hell hounds, hippogriffs, hydra, lamia, lammasu, lycanthropes, manticore, medusa, minotaurs, owl bears, pegasi, phase tigers, remorhaz, rocs, rust monsters, sea serpents, shadows, stirges, throghrin, treants, unicorns, wyverns, and similar monsters. Fantastic creatures cannot be affected by charm person or hold person spells but are usually vulnerable to charm monster and hold monster spells.

Giant Humanoid
Giant humanoids are a type of monster that includes cyclops, ettin, giants, trolls, and other creatures that would be humanoids were it not for their great size and 5 or more Hit Dice. Giant humanoids cannot be affected by charm person or hold person spells, but are vulnerable to charm monster and hold monster spells.

Humanoid
Humanoids are a type of monster that includes bugbears, dryads, dwarves, elves, gnolls, gnomes, goblins, hobgoblins, kobolds, lizardmen, men, mermen, morlocks, neanderthals, naiads, ogres, pixies, sprites, and troglodytes, and other creatures no larger than an ogre and possessing 4 or fewer Hit Dice. Humanoids (other than humans) with character classes are called demi-humans. Humans and demi-humans do not cease to be humanoids even if they achieve 5th level or higher.  All humanoids are vulnerable to charm person and hold person spells. 

Ooze
Oozes are a type of mindless monster that includes black puddings, gelatinous cubes, gray oozes, green slimes, ochre jellies, and yellow molds. Oozes have a variety of different immunities and vulnerabilities, but all are immune to charm, hold, and sleep spells.

Summoned Creature
Summoned creatures are a special type of monster that can be kept at bay by protection from evil and destroyed or driven off by dispel evil. Summoned creatures include djinni, efreeti, elementals, invisible stalkers, and salamanders. Summoned creatures of Chaotic alignment are inherently evil for purposes of detect evil and protection from evil spells. Summoned creatures are usually vulnerable to charm monster and hold monster spells.

Undead
The undead are a type of monster that include spectres, zombies, skeletons, wights, wraiths, vampires, and others. These beings were alive at one time, but through foul magic or by dying at the hands of another undead type, have risen again as undead horrors. Most undead do not make a sound when moving. All such creatures are immune to the effects of gas and poison. Further, they are unaffected by charm, sleep, or hold spells of any sort. All undead are inherently evil for purposes of detect evil and protection from evil spells.

Vermin
Vermin are a type of mindless monster that includes caecilian, cavern locusts, giant ants, giant killer bees, giant beetles, giant crabs, carcass scavengers, giant centipedes, insect swarms, giant leeches, purple worms, rhagodessa, rot grubs, giant scorpions, shriekers, spiders, and other lower life forms. Vermin have such minimal intelligence that they cannot be affected by spells that affect animals. They are usually vulnerable to charm monster and hold monster spells. 

Abbreviations
In written adventures, when monsters are indicated, their characteristics are typically abbreviated in the following order and format: AC, Armor Class; Move, Movement; HD, Hit Dice; hp, hit points; #AT, number of attacks; Dmg, damage; SV, save; ML, morale; AL, alignment. For example: AC 3, Move 90’, HD 1, hp 5, #AT 1, Dmg 1d4, SV F1, ML 0, AL N.
Alignment is abbreviated as follows: C, chaotic; N, neutral; L, lawful.

Monster Listings

Ankheg
% In Lair:	15%
Dungeon Enc:	Cluster (1d6) / Nest (1d8)
Wilderness Enc:	Cluster (1d6) / Nest (1d8)
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	90’ (30’)
      Burrow:	60’ (20’)
Armor Class:	8
Hit Dice:		5**
Attacks:		1
Damage:	3d6 (+ 1d4)
Save:		F5
Morale:		-1
Treasure Type:	M
XP:		500
The ankheg is a burrowing monster with a taste for fresh meat. An ankheg has six legs, and varies in shade from yellow to brown. It is about 10’ long and weighs about 800 pounds.
An ankheg burrows with legs and mandibles. A burrowing ankheg usually does not make a usable tunnel, but can construct one when necessary; it burrows at half speed when it does so. It often digs a winding tunnel up to 40 feet below the surface in the rich soil of forests or farmlands. The tunnel is a tube, 5’ in diameter, from 60’ to 150’ long ([1d10 + 5] × 10). An ankheg usually lies in its tunnel, 5’ to 10’ below the surface, until its antennae detect the approach of prey. It then burrows up to attack. Clusters of ankhegs share the same territory but do not cooperate.
If an ankheg hits an opponent, it inflicts 3d6 points of damage plus an additional 1d4 points of damage from digestive acid excreted by its mandibles. The target must also save versus Paralysis or be grabbed. Grabbed victims are helpless until they escape by making a successful saving throw versus Paralysis on their turn. Once an ankheg has grabbed its prey, it will retreat down its tunnel at its burrow speed, dragging the victim with it. If the ankheg is damaged after grabbing its prey, it will retreat backward down its tunnel at its land speed (not its burrow speed). 
If desperate or frustrated, an ankheg can spit a 30-ft. line of acid for 4d8 points of damage (half damage on a successful saving throw versus Blast). One such attack depletes the ankheg’s acid supply for 6 hours, so it will only spit acid when reduced to fewer than half its hit points or when it has not successfully grabbed an opponent.  

Ant, Giant
% In Lair:	10%
Dungeon Enc:	Scourge (2d4) / Nest (4d6)
Wilderness Enc:	Swarm (4d6) / Nest (4d6)
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	180’ (60’)
Armor Class:	6
Hit Dice:		4
Attacks:		1
Damage:	2d6
Save:		F2
Morale:		-1
Treasure Type:	I plus special
XP:		80
Giant ants are hardy and adaptable insects. Workers are about 6’ long, while the queen may be immense. Giant ants eat almost anything, since they are omnivores, and will never retreat if defending the nest (Morale +4). They tend to have incidental treasure around their nests, left over from past opponents, but in some rare instances giant ants will inexplicably mine precious metals. This occurs in about 30% of nests, where there will be as much as 1d10x1000 gold pieces worth of raw gold nuggets.

Ape, White
% In Lair:	10%
Dungeon Enc:	Troop (1d6) / Den (2d4) 
Wilderness Enc:	Band (2d4) / Den (2d4)
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	120’ (40’)
Armor Class: 	3
Hit Dice: 	4
Attacks: 		2 (claw, claw) or 1 (rock)
Damage: 	1d4/1d4 or 1d6
Save: 		F2
Morale: 		-1
Treasure Type: 	None
XP:		80
White apes are adapted to living in a subterranean environment, only venturing to the surface to forage for food at night. As such, they have lost all pigment. White apes will vocalize and act aggressive if other creatures come near their lair, and may attack. When not engaged in melee, white apes can throw rocks for 1d6 points of damage per round. White apes may occasional be found as pets to neanderthals or morlocks.

Baboon, Rock
% In Lair:	10%
Dungeon Enc:	Troop (2d6) / Den (5d6) 
No. Enc (W):	Band (5d6) / Den (5d6)
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	120’ (40’)
Armor Class:	3
Hit Dice:		2
Attacks:		2 (bite, club)
Damage:	1d3/1d6
Save:		F2
Morale:		0
Treasure Type:	None
XP:		20
These larger, more intelligent baboons are omnivores that often hunt for meat. They both bite and use sticks as clubs. Like its smaller cousin, the rock baboon lives in packs led by the biggest, strongest male. Rock baboons are aggressive, and are easily stimulated to fight. While they do not have a true language, they can communicate threats and warnings with simple screams.

Basilisk
% In Lair:	40%
Dungeon Enc:	Bask (1d6) / Nest (1d6) 
Wilderness Enc: 	Bask (1d6) / Nest (1d6)
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	60’ (20’)
Armor Class:	5
Hit Dice:		6 + 1**
Attacks:		2 (bite, gaze)
Damage:	1d10/petrify
Save:		F6
Morale:		+1
Treasure Type:	K
XP:		980
A basilisk is a reptilian monster that petrifies living creatures with its gaze. A basilisk usually has a dull brown body with a yellowish underbelly. Some specimens sport a short, curved horn atop the nose. An adult basilisk’s body grows to about 10’ long. Basilisks often live in dense woods or dungeons. Any victim that meets the basilisk’s petrifying gaze or is bitten by the basilisk is required to make a saving throw versus Petrification or he turns to stone. Any treasure in a basilisk’s nest will be on petrified victims, and will only be accessible if the victims are restored to flesh. 

Bat
		  Ordinary				Giant
% In Lair:	  35%					35%
Dungeon Enc:	  Flock (1d10) / Nest (1 bat swarm)	Flock (1d10) / Nest (1d10)
Wilderness Enc:	  Flock (1d10) / Nest (1 bat swarm)	Flock (1d10) / Nest (1d10)
Alignment: 	  Neutral      	      	     		Neutral
Movement:	  9’ (3’)				30’ (10’)
Fly:		  120’ (40’)				180’ (60’)
Armor Class:	  3    					3
Hit Dice:	  1hp					2
Attacks:	  1 (bite)				1 (bite)
Damage:		  1 					1d4
Save:		  0 Human				F1
Morale:		  -2					0
Treasure Type:	  None					None
XP:	 	  5					20 (29)
Bats live in sheltered caverns or abandoned buildings, and are nocturnal mammals with leathery wings. Their nocturnal lifestyle has made typical eyesight useless to them, but they are able to navigate with a refined use of sound, or echolocation. For this reason, no spells or other influence that would normally blind an opponent will affect bats, but the spell silence 15’ radius negates their ability to echolocate.
Bats, Ordinary: Ordinary bats are small and do not attack for significant damage individually, However, ordinary bats can swarm in great number. When a bat swarm is rolled, see Swarms later in this chapter for information. Ordinary bats are not particularly predisposed to fight, and as such they are susceptible to a morale roll once each round. The morale roll does not apply to bats that are under another’s control.
Bats, Giant: These bats are larger than normal bats and are fierce carnivores. About 95% of giant bats are of this normal variety, but the remaining portion are vampiric, with a bite that will cause paralysis if a saving throw versus Paralysis is not rolled successfully. This paralysis lasts for 1d10 rounds. Unless otherwise distracted, a giant vampiric bat will feed on a paralyzed victim, dealing 1d4 points of damage per round from blood loss. If the opponent is killed by this attack, he must succeed in a saving throw versus Spells or he will rise again as a vampire one day after his death. Giant vampiric bats are worth 29xp, rather than 20xp.

Bear
		  Black					Grizzly
% In Lair:	  25%					25%
Dungeon Enc:	  Sloth (1d4) / Den (1d4)		Solitary (1) / Den (1d4)
Wilderness Enc:	  Sloth (1d4) / Den (1d4)		Sloth (1d4) / Den (1d4)
Alignment: 	  Neutral     	    			Neutral
Movement:	  120’ (40’)				120’ (40’)
Armor Class:	  3    					3
Hit Dice:	  4					5
Attacks:	  3 (2 claws, bite)			3 (2 claws, bite)
Damage:		  1d3/1d3/1d6 				1d4/1d4/1d8
Save:		  F2					F2
Morale:		  -1					0
Treasure Type:	  None					None
XP:	 	  80					200

		  Cave					Polar
% In Lair:	  25%					35%
Dungeon Enc:	  Solitary (1) / Den (1d2)		Sloth (1d2) / Den (1d2)
Wilderness Enc:	  Sloth (1d2) / Den (1d2)		Sloth (1d2) / Den (1d2)
Alignment: 	  Neutral     	    			Neutral
Movement:	  120’ (40’)				120’ (40’)
Armor Class:	  3    					4
Hit Dice:	  6					7
Attacks:	  3 (2 claws, bite)			3 (2 claws, bite)
Damage:		  1d6/1d6/1d10				1d8/1d8/2d6
Save:		  F3					F3
Morale:		  0					+1
Treasure Type:	  None					None
XP:	 	  320					440
Bears can live in many different climates, and are dangerous predators. They attack with both claws and a bite, and if both claws successfully strike in one round, the bear also squeezes the character in a powerful hug that does an additional 2d8 points of damage. All bears are omnivorous, but some kinds of bears prefer flesh more than other kinds.
Black Bear: A black bear averages 6’ tall, has black fur, and eats a variety of fruits and other foliage more frequently than meat. Though they will give their lives in defense of their cubs, black bears do not usually engage in combat unless they are forced to.
Cave Bear: These immense prehistoric bears are 15’ tall and are vicious hunters. They live in caves and caverns, and particularly savor humanoid flesh. They are able to follow wounded creatures by the smell of their blood.
Grizzly Bear: A grizzly bear may have red or brown fur, and in older individuals it may be silver-tipped. These large bears average 9’ tall and are more aggressive and interested in meat than black bears.
Polar Bear: These bears live in very cold climates, usually by the sea. They average about 11’ tall and almost exclusively eat meat. They are adept at swimming and moving on ice and snow.

Bee, Giant Killer
% In Lair:	35%
Dungeon Enc:	Flight (1d6) / Hive (5d6)
Wilderness Enc:	Swarm (5d6) / Hive (5d6)
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	150’ (50’)
Armor Class:	2
Hit Dice:		1d4 hit points*
Attacks:		1 (sting)
Damage:	1d3, see below
Save:		F1
Morale:		+1
Treasure Type:	Special
XP:		6
Although many times larger than normal killer bees, growing to a length of about 1’, giant killer bees behave similarly to their smaller cousins. Generally, the giant killer bees will attack any creature they encounter, especially if it is near their hive, which is an underground labyrinth of tunnels. They attack with a poisonous sting that requires a successful saving throw versus Poison. Failure results in death. A stinger always breaks off inside the victim, and if the victim survives the poison he suffers an additional 1 point of damage per round until the stinger is removed. A bee that successfully strikes dies the following round from the trauma of losing its stinger. A character must spend 1 round to remove a stinger. 
A giant killer bee hive will be ruled by a queen bee with 2 Hit Dice. A queen bee can be as large as 4’, and may sting multiple times (her stinger does not break off with a successful attack). The queen will be guarded by 10 large giant killer bee drones with 1 Hit Dice each. Giant killer bees make a special honey in their hive. If eaten, the honey acts as a half-strength potion of healing (healing 1d4 points of damage). One hive’s honey will yield 1d4 doses.

Beetle, Giant
		Fire			     Bombardier			   Tiger		
% In Lair:	40%			     40%			   40%
Dungeon Enc:	Cluster (1d8) / Nest (2d6)   Cluster (1d8) / Nest (2d6)	   Cluster (1d6) / Nest (2d4)
Wilderness Enc:	Scourge (2d6) / Nest (2d6)   Scourge (2d6) / Nest (2d6)	   Scourge (2d4) / Nest (2d4)
Alignment: 	Neutral	      	     	     Neutral 	     	  	   Neutral
Movement:	120’ (40’)		     120’ (40’)			   150’ (50’)
Armor Class:	5    			     5	  			   6
Hit Dice:	1 + 2			     2				   3 + 1
Attacks:	1 (bite)		     1 (bite)			   1 (bite)
Damage:		2d4			     1d6, see below		   2d6
Save:		F1			     F1	      			   F1
Morale:		-1			     0				   +1
Treasure Type:	None			     None			   None
XP:	 	15			     20				   65
Giant Fire Beetle: These subterranean, nocturnal beetles are about 2 ½’ long. The fire beetle is so named for the light-producing organs it exhibits on its head and abdomen. They produce light within a 10’ radius. Two of these organs are on the head, and one is on the abdomen. If removed from the corpse of the beetle they will continue to illuminate an area for 1d6 days.
Giant Bombardier Beetle: These 3’ long beetles have immense horn-like jaws that inflict damage, in addition to a toxic spray that can squirt an opponent within 5’ of the beetle. When the toxic fluid successfully strikes an opponent, it is extremely painful and causes chemical burns and blisters. This effect makes the opponent suffer a -2 penalty to attack throws for 1 day, or until the spell cure light wounds is used. These beetles can be found above and below ground.
Giant Tiger Beetle: These fierce carnivorous beetles, measuring up to 5’ long, have a carapace with markings resembling the hide of a tiger. Though they often hunt giant insects, they also attack and eat large mammals, including humanoids.

Black Pudding
% In Lair:	None
Dungeon Enc:	Solitary (1) 
Wilderness Enc:	None
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	60’ (20’)
Armor Class:	3
Hit Dice:		10*
Attacks:		1
Damage:	3d8
Save:		F5
Morale:		N/A
Treasure Type:	None
XP:		1,550 
This black gooey mass slithers about in dungeon corridors, eating anything in its path. It is typically 10’ to 30’ in diameter. It is capable of moving not just on the floor, but also on the wall and ceiling, and may compress itself through small fissures and under the cracks of doors. It digests through both metal and wood, but not stone. A black pudding can be damaged only by fire, and takes full damage from torches, magical flame, or a flame tongue sword. If attacked with cold-based attacks, it will take no damage, but the black pudding will be paralyzed for one round per die of damage the attack would normally deal. 
If attacked with normal or magical weapons, or with lightning or electricity, a black pudding suffers no injury, but will be split into two puddings; the Judge should divide the original black pudding's Hit Dice between the two however he sees fit, with the limitation that neither pudding may have less than two Hit Dice. A two Hit Die black pudding does only 1d8 damage, is unharmed by additional weapon or lightning-based attacks, and cannot be split further. 

Blink Dog
% In Lair:	20%
Dungeon Enc:	Pack (1d6) / Den (2d6)
Wilderness Enc:	Route (2d6) / Den (2d6)
Alignment:	Lawful
Movement:	120’ (40’)
Armor Class:	4
Hit Dice:		4*
Attacks:		1 (bite)
Damage:	1d6
Save:		F4
Morale:		-2
Treasure Type:	I
XP:		135
The blink dog is an intelligent canine that has a limited teleportation ability. Blink dogs have their own language, a mixture of barks, yaps, whines, and growls that can transmit complex information. Blink dogs hunt in packs, teleporting, or “blinking” out of one location and “blinking” in close to prey for their attack. They blink again immediately after their attack, appearing 1d4x10 feet away from the opponent. Blink dogs never blink into the same space occupied by another object. When blink dogs flee, they simply blink away and fail to appear again.

Boar
			Ordinary		Giant
% In Lair:		None			None
Dungeon Enc:		Sounder (1d4)		Sounder (1d4)
Wilderness Enc:		Sounder (1d6)		Sounder (1d4+1)
Alignment: 		Neutral			Neutral
Movement:		150’ (50’)		120’ (40’)
Armor Class:		2    			3
Hit Dice:		3			5	
Attacks:		1 (tusk)		1 (tusk)
Damage:			2d4			3d4
Save:			F2			F5
Morale:			+2			+2
Treasure Type:		None			None
XP:	 		50			200
Ordinary: These cantankerous omnivores are generally encountered in wooded locations, but exist in many different geographic locations and climates. They do not generally initiate combat, but may do so to defend young, or if threatened.
Giant: These 15’ long giant cousins to ordinary boars are much more aggressive. They attack with little to no provocation, and crave the meat of humanoids. They are sometimes found with demon boars. There are rumors of a shaggy giant boar that is native to cold climates.

Bugbear
% In Lair:	25%
Dungeon Enc:	Gang (2d4) / Lair (1 warband)
Wilderness Enc:	Warband (1d4 gangs) / Village (1d10 warbands)
Alignment:	Chaotic
Movement:	90’ (30’)
Armor Class:	4
Hit Dice:		3 + 1
Attacks:		1 (weapon)
Damage:	2d4 or weapon + 1
Save:		F3
Morale:		+2
Treasure Type:	L (per warband)
XP:		65
These large, hairy beastmen were magically bred from hobgoblins and bears by the ancient Zaharans. They are quite strong, and receive a +1 to damage when they employ weapons. Despite their bulk, they are deceptively stealthy, so characters encountering bugbears suffer a -1 penalty to surprise rolls. Bugbears prefer to fight with morning stars, swords, and axes in melee combat, but will usually hurl spears, hammers, and other throwing weapons before closing. They carry shields but otherwise rely on their shaggy hides for armor. 
Each bugbear gang will be led by a champion with AC5, 4+1 Hit Dice, 25 hit points, and a +2 bonus to damage rolls from strength. Each bugbear warband will be led by a sub-chieftain with AC6, 5+1 Hit Dice, 29 hit points, and a +3 bonus to damage rolls. A bugbear lair or village will be led by a chieftain with AC7, 7+2 Hit Dice, 37 hit points, and a +4 bonus to damage rolls. As long as the chieftain is alive, the bugbears will gain a +1 to morale rolls. Bugbear lairs and villages will have females and young equal to 50% of the number of males each. Female bugbears fight as hobgoblins, while young bugbears fight as kobolds. 
When bugbears are encountered in a village, certain additional creatures may be present. A bugbear village has a 75% chance of a shaman being present, and a 50% chance of a witch doctor. A shaman is equivalent to a sub-chieftain statistically, but has Clerical abilities at level 1d6. A witch doctor is equivalent to a champion statistically, but has Mage abilities at level 1d4. 

Caecilian
% In Lair:	25%
Dungeon Enc:	Clew (1d3) / Nest (1d3)
Wilderness Enc:	Clew (1d3) / Nest (1d3)
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	60’ (20’)
Armor Class:	3
Hit Dice:		6*
Attacks:		1 (bite)
Damage:	1d8
Save:		F3
Morale:		+1
Treasure Type:	K
XP:		570
These 30’ long gray worms attack with wide tooth-rimmed mouths. Caecilians are able to swallow whole creatures of up to man size on an unmodified attack throw of 19 or 20. A creature that is swallowed whole suffers 1d8 points of damage every round, and this continues until either the caecilian is killed or until the swallowed creature dies. The cramped quarters inside the belly of the worm prevent attack from the inside by any weapon except a dagger. Attacking a caecilian from inside its belly is difficult, so the swallowed creature suffers a -4 penalty to its attack throw. Should a swallowed creature die and remain in the caecilian’s belly for 6 turns, it is irrecoverably digested. Because of their propensity to swallow creatures whole, any encounter with caecilians may yield treasure, whether wandering or in lair. The treasure (if any) is always found inside the creature’s belly.

Camel
% In Lair:	None
Dungeon Enc:	None
Wilderness Enc:	Caravan (2d4)
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	150’ (50’)
Armor Class:	2
Hit Dice:		2
Attacks:		2 (bite, hoof)
Damage:	1/1d4
Save:		F1
Morale:		-1
Treasure Type:	None
XP:		20
Camels are known for their ability to travel long distances without food or water, and they may travel for a period of 2 weeks without water if they are well hydrated to begin with. They are efficient at traveling in the desert, and will not suffer movement penalties in this terrain. Camels are temperamental, and are known to often kick or bite those who handle them. Camels can carry 30 stone (300lb) and move at their regular movement rate, and can carry up to 60 stone (600 lb) at half movement. A mounted camel rider may not use a lance for a charge attack.

Carcass Scavenger
% In Lair:	None
Dungeon Enc:	Clew (1d3) 
Wilderness Enc:	Clew (1d3)
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	120’ (40’)
Armor Class:	2
Hit Dice:		3 + 1**
Attacks:		8 (stingers)
Damage:	Paralysis
Save:		F2
Morale:		+2
Treasure Type:	None
XP:		135
The dreaded carcass scavenger is 4’ tall and 9’ long, and resembles a giant fat grub with multifaceted eyes, small legs, and with a head bearing 2’ long insect-like feelers tipped with a poisonous stinger. This creature is rumored to be a magical abomination created from a giant maggot. When the stingers strike an opponent, he must succeed in a saving throw versus Paralysis or become paralyzed for 2d4 turns. If not faced with more opponents, the carcass scavenger will swallow the paralyzed character on the subsequent round, killing him. Paralysis may be cured with cure light wounds, but when used in this way it does not heal damage.

Cat, Large
			Mountain Lion			Panther			    Lion
% In Lair:		10%	 			10%			    25%
Dungeon Enc:		Litter (1d4) / Den (1d4)	Litter (1d2) / Den (1d6)    Pride (1d4) / Den (1d8)
Wilderness Enc:		Litter (1d4) / Den (1d4)	Pride (1d6) / Den (1d6)	    Pride (1d4) / Den (1d8)
Alignment: 		Neutral	       	   		Neutral	      	  	    Neutral
Movement:		150’ (50’)			210’ (70’)		    150’ (50’)
Armor Class:		3    				5    			    3
Hit Dice:		3 + 2				4			    5
Attacks:		3 (2 claws, 1 bite)		3 (2 claws, 1 bite)	    3 (2 claws, 1 bite)
Damage:			1d3/1d3/1d6   			1d4/1d4/1d8   		    1d4+1/1d4+1/1d10
Save:			F2				F2			    F3
Morale:			0				0			    +1
Treasure Type:		None				None			    None
XP:	 		65				80			    200

			Tiger				Sabre-tooth Tiger
% In Lair:		5%				10%     
Dungeon Enc:		Solitary (1) / Den (1d3)	Troop (1d4) / Den (1d4)
Wilderness Enc:		Solitary (1) / Den (1d3)	Troop (1d4) / Den (1d4)
Alignment: 		Neutral	       	   		Neutral
Movement:		150’ (50’)			150’ (50’)
Armor Class:		3    				3
Hit Dice:		6				8
Attacks:		3 (2 claws, 1 bite)		3 (2 claws, 1 bite)
Damage:			1d6/1d6/2d6   			1d8/1d8/2d8
Save:			F3				F4
Morale:			+1				+2
Treasure Type:		None				None
XP:	 		320				600
Large cats are some of the most efficient hunters. They kill only for food or in defense, and generally remain above ground in wilderness settings. Sometimes a large cat will taste the blood of humans and become a man-killer, preferring to hunt humans over any other prey. Large cats will always give chase if an opponent runs away. 
Mountain Lion: These large cats are light brown and blend in well in their preferred habitat, which includes mountains and high grassy meadows. However, they may be found in nearly any habitat. These cats will occasionally be found in dungeons.
Panther: These fast-running predators are at home in grassy plains and wooded areas.
Lion: Lions are very social cats, and live in groups. They prefer hot climates, typically living on savannah.
Tiger: These large hunters typically live in subtropical or cooler environments. Their striped hides provide cover when hunting prey, and they are extremely stealthy. Characters encountering tigers in wooded environments suffer a -2 penalty to surprise rolls. 
Sabre-tooth Tiger: These prehistoric hunters are fearsome and immense. They have extremely large canine teeth, which make them particularly dangerous killers.

Centaur
% In Lair:	5%
Dungeon Enc:	None
Wilderness Enc:	Troop (2d10) / Lair (1 troop)
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	180’ (60’)
Armor Class:	4
Hit Dice:		4
Attacks:		3 (2 hooves, weapon)
Damage:	1d6/1d6, weapon
Save:		F4
Morale:		0
Treasure Type:	L
XP:		80
Centaurs have the body and legs of horses, but the upper body of humans. They are reclusive beings, and live far from other humanoids in densely wooded sylvan settings. They are able to attack by kicking with two legs at a time, as well as attacking with a weapon. Centaurs typically wear leather armor and carry oaken clubs and composite bows. 
Each centaur troop will be led by a chieftain with AC6, 5 Hit Dice, 29 hit points, and a +2 bonus to damage rolls from strength. A chieftain has a 50% chance of possessing Clerical abilities at level 1d6. Centaur lairs will have females and young equal to twice the number of males, with an additional 5d6 young.  Centaurs avoid conflict if possible, but the males will fight to guard their communities. Usually, females and young do not fight, and will seek escape if combat occurs. Female centaurs fight as 3 Hit Dice monsters and inflict 1d4/1d4 points of damage with their hooves, while young centaurs fight as 2 Hit Dice monsters and inflict 1d2/1d2 damage. If forced into combat, centaurs are unlikely to surrender.

Centipede, Giant
% In Lair:	10%
Dungeon Enc:	Scourge (2d4) / Nest (2d12)
Wilderness Enc:	Swarm (2d12) / Nest (2d12)
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	60’ (20’)
Armor Class:	0
Hit Dice:		1d4 hp*
Attacks:		1 (bite)
Damage:	Poison
Save:		0 level Human
Morale:		-1
Treasure Type:	None
XP:		6
These 1’ long centipedes prefer dark, wet locations. Giant centipedes attack with a poisonous bite. No damage is inflicted by the bite, but anyone bitten must make a saving throw versus Poison. Failure indicates that the victim is horribly sick for a period of 10 days.  While sick, poisoned characters can only move at ½ speed, and no other physical activity is possible. 

Chimera
% In Lair:	40%
Dungeon Enc:	Brood (1d2) / Den (1d4)
Wilderness Enc:	Flock (1d4) / Den (1d4)
Alignment:	Chaotic
Movement:	120’ (40’)
	Fly:	180’ (60’)
Armor Class:	5
Hit Dice:		9*
Attacks:		5 (2 claws, 3 heads, see below)
Damage:	1d3/1d3/2d4/2d4/3d4, see below
Save:		F9
Morale:		+1
Treasure Type:	K x2
XP:		1,300
The chimera is a magical hybrid of lion, goat, and red dragon. It has a head of each of these creature types, including the wings of a dragon, the front portion of the body from a lion, and the rear portion from a goat. The lion head may attack with a bite, the goat head may gore with horns, and the dragon head can both bite and use a fiery breath weapon that is a cone 50’ long and 10’ wide at its terminal end. 
This fire breath deals 3d6 points of damage, with a saving throw versus Breath allowed to reduce damage by half. Like ordinary dragons, the red dragon head can only use the breath weapon 3 times per day; it will use either a bite or the breath weapon 50% of the time, until the breath weapon runs out and it may only bite. The chimera may live in the wilderness, particularly hilly terrain, but also takes up residence in dungeons.

Cockatrice
% In Lair:	30%
Dungeon Enc:	Brood (1d4) / Nest (1d8)
Wilderness Enc:	Flock (1d8) / Nest (1d8)
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	90’ (30’)
	Fly:	180’ (60’)
Armor Class:	3
Hit Dice:		5*
Attacks:		2 (beak, petrify)
Damage:	1d6, petrify
Save:		F5
Morale:		-1
Treasure Type:	I
XP:		350
The cockatrice is a magical creature that has the body of a rooster and the tail of a reptile. It is a small creature, about the size of a natural rooster, but has a powerful beak that inflicts 1d6 points of damage. If the cockatrice successfully attacks an opponent, the opponent must succeed in a saving throw versus Petrification or turn to stone. Opponents foolish enough to lay bare hands on a cockatrice must also save or be turned to stone, but attacks with a weapon, prods with a 10’ pole, or other maneuvers do not risk petrification. Cockatrices are ill-tempered creatures, and though they primarily eat small insects or rodents, they will engage larger animals and characters in combat with little provocation. They live in any climate, including dungeons. Any treasure found in a cockatrice nest will be on petrified victims, and will only be accessible if the victims are restored to flesh. 

Crab, Giant
% In Lair:	90%
Dungeon Enc:	Clutter (1d2) / Nest (1d6)
Wilderness Enc:	Cluster (1d6) / Colony (2d6)
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	60’ (20’)
Armor Class:	7
Hit Dice:		3
Attacks:		2 (pinchers)
Damage:	2d6/2d6
Save:		F2
Morale:		-1
Treasure Type:	None
XP:		50
These giant cousins to ordinary crabs are unintelligent, and merely exist to eat. They are found in any watery environment, and do not have to remain fully submerged. They can be found prowling along fresh or saltwater shores, marshes, and watery subterranean caves.

Crocodile  
			Ordinary		Large			Giant
% In Lair:		None			None			None
Dungeon Enc:		None			None			None
Wilderness Enc:		Bask (1d8)		Bask (1d4)		Bask (1d3)
Alignment: 		Neutral         	Neutral			Neutral
Movement:		90’ (30’)       	90’ (30’)		90’ (30’)
Swim:			90’ (30’)       	90’ (30’)		90’ (30’)
Armor Class:		4      			6   			8
Hit Dice:		2			6			15
Attacks:		1			1			1
Damage:			1d8      		2d8			3d8
Save:			F1			F3			F8
Morale:			-1			-1			+1
Treasure Type:		None    		None			None
XP:	 		20			320			1,800
Crocodiles are aggressive reptiles with fearsome bites. They breathe air, but are aquatic and usually remain submerged or within shallow water, waiting for prey to come within reach. Characters encountering submerged crocodiles suffer a -2 penalty to throws versus surprise. Ordinary crocodiles are about 12’ long. Large crocodiles, on average, grow to a length of 20’. Giant crocodiles are big, prehistoric beasts that can reach a length of 25’ - 50’. 

Cyclops
% In Lair:	20%
Dungeon Enc:	Solitary (1) / Lair (1d4)
Wilderness Enc:	Gang (1d4) / Lair (1d4)
Alignment:	Chaotic
Movement:	90’ (30’)
Armor Class:	4
Hit Dice:		13
Attacks:		1
Damage:	3d10
Save:		F13
Morale:		+1
Treasure Type:	N
XP:		1,400
Cyclops are 20’ tall relatives to giants with but one large eye centered on their face. They employ large clubs as weapons, but also throw rocks up to 200’ for 3d6 points of damage. They have reduced depth perception and suffer a -2 penalty to attack throws. A few cyclops have the ability to issue a curse one time per week (reverse of remove curse). Cyclops are loners, and live together in small numbers only on occasion. They typically keep flocks of sheep, and often cultivate grapes. They live in caves.

Demon Boar
% In Lair:	20%
Dungeon Enc:	Sounder (1d4) / Lair (1d4)
Wilderness Enc:	Sounder (1d4) / Lair (1d4)
Alignment:	Chaotic
Movement:	120’ (40’)
	Boar:	180’ (60’)
Armor Class:	6 (0)
Hit Dice:		9**
Attacks:		1 (gore or weapon)
Damage:	2d6 or weapon
Save:		F9
Morale:		+2
Treasure Type:	O, L 
XP:		2,000
The demon boar is a more powerful and much more malicious variation of the wereboar. It delights in the taste of human flesh, and will take residence and hunt near areas occupied by man. In human form they are fat and grotesque; while in boar form they are immense. Like other lycanthropes, they can pass on their form of lycanthropy (refer to the lycanthrope monster listing), and are only damaged by magical or silver weapons. Demon boars have the innate ability to charm others 3 times per day. Victims are allowed a saving throw versus Spells with a -2 penalty, but if they are fail they are utterly enslaved to the creature’s will. Demon boars, though powerful, will usually attempt to catch opponents by surprise and dominate them before they can fight back. When encountered in their lair, demon boars have a 75% probability of having 1d3 charmed human thralls. Thralls should be rolled up as NPC adventurers, but are unable to cast spells or use magical items due to being under mental domination. 

Djinni
% In Lair:	None
Dungeon Enc:	Solitary (1)
Wilderness Enc:	Solitary (1)
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	90’ (30’)
	Fly:	240’ (80’)
Armor Class:	4
Hit Dice:		7 + 1**
Attacks:		1 (fist), see below
Damage:	2d8 or 2d6
Save:		F14
Morale:		+4
Treasure Type:	None
XP:		1,300
Although they look like taller, majestic humans, djinn are actually an intelligent kind of air elemental. Djinn may only be affected by magic and magical weapons. Djinn have several spell-like abilities, and they can use each of them 3 times a day. They have four creation abilities, including create food and water (cast as a cleric of 7th level), create temporary objects of metal (the softer the metal the longer it lasts, gold lasts 24 hours while iron lasts 1 round, 10 stone maximum), create permanent goods (items made of wood, rope, and other kinds of softer goods of 10 stone maximum), and create illusions (as the spell phantasmal force but affecting both sight and sound, with an effect that is permanent until touched or dispelled). Djinn can also take on a gaseous form or make themselves invisible. 
Finally, djinn can assume the form of a whirlwind after 5 rounds of preparation. It has a 10’ diameter at its base, is 70’ high, and is 20’ in diameter at its top end. When in whirlwind form, the djinn may move 120’ (40’). The whirlwind deals 2d6 points of damage to all beings that it contacts. Beings with 2 or fewer Hit Dice must make a saving throw versus Breath or are thrown 10’ away. A djinn may also attack with powerful punches that inflict 2d8 points of damage. Djinn are very strong, and are able to transport 60 stone easily. They may transport a maximum of 120 stone for a period of 3 turns. However, after this period a djinni will have to spend 1 full turn resting.

Dog
			Hunting			War
% In Lair:		10%			10%
Dungeon Enc:		Pack (2d6) / Den (3d6)  Pack (1d4) / Den (2d4)
Wilderness Enc:		Route (3d6) / Den (3d6)	Route (2d4) / Den (2d4)
Alignment: 		Neutral           	Neutral
Movement:		180’ (60’)     		150’ (50’)
Armor Class:		2    			3    
Hit Dice:		1+1			2+2
Attacks:		1			1
Damage:			1d4			1d6
Save:			F1			F1
Morale:			0			+2
Treasure Type:		None           		None
XP:	 		15			35
Hunting Dogs: Hunting dogs are fast, lean hounds trained to track and bring down prey by working in packs. Most hunting dogs can scent prey, giving them the equivalent of Tracking proficiency. Sight hounds are faster (210’) but without tracking proficiency.
War Dogs: War dogs are heavy, fierce mastiffs trained to kill on command. While dangerous, they are capable of great loyalty to their masters when properly trained. When used in battle, war dogs are usually equipped with leather armor and spiked collars. This reduces their movement to 90’, but increases AC to 5 and damage to 1d6+1. Dwarven lords commonly employ war dogs to guard their subterranean vaults. 

Doppelganger
% In Lair:	20%
Dungeon Enc:	Throng (1d6) / Lair (1d6) 
Wilderness Enc: 	Throng (1d6) / Lair (1d6)
Alignment:	Chaotic
Movement:	90’ (30’)
Armor Class:	4
Hit Dice:		4*
Attacks:		1
Damage:	1d12
Save:		F10
Morale:		+2
Treasure Type:	I
XP:		135
Doppelgangers are strange beings that are able to take on the shapes of any humanoid creature they encounter. Doppelgangers make excellent use of their natural mimicry to stage ambushes, bait traps, and infiltrate humanoid society. They will often try to kill the person they imitate, to then attack a group by surprise. Doppelgangers revert to their natural forms when slain. In this shape, a doppelganger is 5 ½’ tall, with large, bulging yellow eyes with slitted pupils. Its body resembles that of a sickly humanoid, with pale, hairless flesh, gangly limbs and half-formed features. A doppelganger’s appearance is deceiving even when it’s in its true form, for it is a hardy creature with a natural agility not in keeping with its frail appearance. Regardless of their present form, doppelgangers are immune to the effects of charm and sleep spells.

Dragon
% In Lair:	Varies
Dungeon Enc:	Varies
Wilderness Enc:	Varies
Alignment:	Any
Movement:	90’ (30’)
Fly:	240’ (80’)
Armor Class:	Varies
Hit Dice:		Varies
Attacks:		3 or breath weapon
Damage:	Varies
Save:		Varies
Morale:		Varies
Treasure Type:	Varies
XP:		Varies

Ancient, avaricious, and dangerous, dragons are a powerful race of intelligent reptiles that are deeply connected to the elemental powers of the world. This innate elemental power makes dragons the longest lived of all beasts. Dragons can live for over a thousand years, growing in size and power with every passing century. But whatever their age, all dragons are completely carnivorous, egg-laying monsters forever inscrutable to the minds of men. 
All true dragons belong to the same race of creatures and can inter-breed. Nevertheless, dragons come in an astounding variety of shapes, colors, and powers. Due to their connection to the elements, dragons come to reflect the terrain and climate of their habitats over time, and can be grouped into general categories on this basis. For instance, dragons that dwell in glaciers or frigid tundra will develop a white hide and freezing breath weapon, earning the name white dragons. 
A dragon’s Armor Class, Hit Dice, breath weapon, and other abilities depend on a combination of the dragon’s age and habitat. See the Primary Dragon Attributes, Secondary Dragon Attributes, and Dragon Attributes by Habitat tables, below.  



Primary Dragon Attributes
Category       Age		% In Lair	AC	HD	Damage		Save	Morale	Treasure Type	XP
Spawn	       1-5 years	90%  		3	2*	1d2/1d2/2d3	F2	0	B	 	29
Very Young     6-15 years	70%		4	4**	1d3/1d3/2d4	F4	0	H		190
Young	       16-25 years	50%		5	6**	1d4/1d4/2d6	F6	0	N		820
Juvenile       26-50 years	40%		6	8**	1d6/1d6/2d8	F8	0	Q		1,600
Adult	       51-75 years	40%		7	10***	2d3/2d3/2d10	F10	+1	Q, N		2,950
Mature Adult   75-100 years	30%		8	12***	1d8/1d8/3d8	F12	+1	Q, N		3,900
Old    	       101-200 years	40%		9	14***	2d4/2d4/3d10	F14	+1	R  		4,900
Very Old       201-400 years	50%		10	16****	1d10/1d10/4d8	F16	+2	R		7,200
Ancient	       401-700 years	70%		11	18****	1d12/1d12/4d10	F18	+2	R		8,400
Venerable      701+ years	90%		12	20*****	3d4/3d4/5d8	F20	+3	R, N		12,800

Secondary Dragon Attributes												Spells Per Day
Category  	 Dungeon Encounter	Wilderness Encounter	Chance Aspleep	Chance Speech	Special Abilities	1  2  3  4  5
Spawn		 1d4	 		1d4	   		80%    		1%     		None			1  -  -	 -  -
Very Young	 1d4			1d4			70%		2%		None			2  -  -	 -  -
Young		 1d4			1d4			60%		5%		None			2  1  -	 -  -
Juvenile	 1d4			1d4			50%		10%		None			2  2  -	 -  -
Adult		 1d4			1d4			40%		20%		1 ability		2  2  1	 -  -
Mature Adult	 1d4			1d4			30%		35%		1 ability		2  2  2	 -  -
Old    		 1d2			1d2			20%		50%		1 ability		3  2  2	 1  -
Very Old	 1d2			1d2			10%		75%		2 abilities		3  3  2	 2  -
Ancient		 1d2			1d2			5%		100%		2 abilities		3  3  3	 2  -
Venerable	 1			1			0%		100%		3 abilities		3  3  3	 3  2

Dragon Attributes by Habitat
Habitat				Common Name		Hide Color					Breath Weapon
Any sinkhole of evil		Wyrm   			Purple taupe, liver, charcoal, or black		40’ long, 40’ wide, cloud, fetid gas
Any pinnacle of good		Metallic dragon		Bronze, silver, electrum, or gold 		90’ long, 30’ wide, cone, fire
Clouds, mountain peaks		Blue dragon		Sky blue, slate grey, cloud white		100’ long, 5’ wide, line, lightning bolt
Deserts, wastelands		Brown dragon		Burnt orange, copper, or sandy brown		90’ long, 30’ wide, cone, scouring wind
Oceans, lakes			Sea dragon		Sea green, teal, or cerulean blue		90’ long, 30’ wide, cloud, blistering steam
Glaciers, icy caves		White dragon		Ivory, pearl, or snow white  			90’ long, 30’ wide, cloud, freezing vapor
Volcanoes, badlands		Red dragon		Flaming red, burnt orange, or charcoal		90’ long, 30’ wide, cone, fire
Woods, jungles			Green dragon		Moss green, olive, or forest green		40’ long, 40’ wide, cloud, poison vapor 
Swamps, marshes			Black dragon		Green-grey, midnight green, or black		100’ long, 5’ wide, line, acid

Dragon Breath Weapons
Dragons are able to produce a powerful attack with a breath weapon. Though the classic breath weapon is the fire from a “fire-breathing dragon,” different dragons breathe different kinds of effects. All dragons' breath weapons deal 1d6 points of damage per Hit Die of the dragon and are usable 3 times per day. Unless the situation prevents it, dragons will tend to use their breath weapon as their initial attack when confronted with combat. Dragons will use their breath weapons about 50% of the time on all subsequent rounds of combat. When the breath weapon is not employed, they will attack with two claws and a bite attack. 
A dragon’s breath weapon can have one of three potential shapes: cloud shaped, cone shaped, and line shaped. All cloud-shaped breath effects occupy an area that is 20’ high, 40’ long, and 40’ wide. Cone-shaped effects begin with a width of 2’, and spread out into a cone shape 90’ long and 30’ wide. Line shaped breath weapons have the same 5’ width for their entire lengths (100’). All creatures within the area of effect will take full damage from the breath unless they make a saving throw versus Breath. Success indicates that the creature takes only half damage. 
Dragons are immune to the effects of their own breath weapon, as well as the same kind of breath weapon from other dragons. They are further immune to ordinary instances of a similar nature to their attack. For instance, a red dragon is immune to all ordinary fire and the fire breath of all other dragons. However, dragons will sustain half damage from magical based attacks that are similar to the nature of their breath weapons. A blue dragon, for instance, will not suffer damage from a natural lightning strike, but will suffer half damage from spell lightning bolt. 
In addition to damage, certain breath weapons have special effects, noted below:
Acid: The acid stream will burn through wooden or metal barriers and continue beyond them to its full length. The acid can corrode metal, wood, and cloth it touches, but cannot harm stone. 
Fetid Gas: Creatures that fail to save versus Breath are afflicted by a noxious rotting disease which causes their body to deteriorate. They lose 1d4 points of STR, DEX, and CON each day until cured by a cure disease spell from a 9th level or higher cleric. If any of the character’s ability scores is reduced to 0, the character dies. Lost ability score points are recovered at a rate of 1 per day after the disease is cured.
Blistering Steam, Freezing Vapors, Poison Vapor, or Scouring Wind: For one round after the dragon breathes, the area of effect is partly obscured by the billowing vapors, steam, or dust. Attacks into or through the area suffer a -2 penalty.
Lightning Bolt: The bolt can melt metals with a low melting point, such as lead, gold, copper, silver, or bronze. If the damage caused to an interposing barrier shatters or breaks through it, the bolt may continue beyond the barrier.
Fire: The fire ignites combustibles and damages objects in the area. It can melt metals with low melting points, such as lead, gold, copper, silver, and bronze. If the damage caused to an interposing barrier shatters or breaks through it, the breath may continue beyond the barrier in order to attain its full volume.

Dragon Special Abilities
As they age, dragons become increasingly powerful. Refer to the Secondary Dragon Attributes table and select powers appropriate to the dragon’s habitat and alignment from the list below, or make up your own. 
Clutching Claws: The dragon can make a dive attack with its claws, dealing double damage. If the dragon hits a creature smaller than itself with both its claw attacks, the dragon automatically grabs the creature struck (no saving throw). To escape the dragon’s claws the character must make a successful saving throw versus Paralysis at -4. Grabbed humanoids, and any creatures with less than half the dragon’s Hit Dice, can be carried off.
Decapitating Bite: On a natural attack throw of 19-20, the dragon’s bite may decapitate its target. The character bitten must make a saving throw versus Death or die. Even if the saving throw is successful, the character will suffer quadruple damage from the bite.
Elemental Aura: The dragon is surrounded by an aura of elemental energy appropriate to its breath weapon (a red dragon might be wreathed in flame, for instance). Characters within 5’ of the dragon take 1d4 points of damage per round from this aura. 
Fear Aura: When the dragon charges or flies overhead, it causes fear in its opponents. All creatures with less than 1 Hit Dice flee in panic for 4d6 turns. All creatures with 1-3 Hit Dice must save versus Paralysis or be paralyzed with fear. All creatures with more than 3 Hit Dice must save versus Paralysis or suffer a -1 to attack throws. The fear effects last until the dragon is slain or passes out of sight and sound.
Gem-Encrusted Hide: The dragon’s hide is coated with gemstones and coins from centuries of lying on its treasure pile. Because of this protection, it gains a +2 bonus to AC, but its movement is reduced by 30’.  The AC bonus increases to +3 when the dragon becomes Very Old, and +4 when the dragon becomes Venerable. 
Horrific Stench: Characters within 20’ of the dragon must make a Saving Throw versus Poison or be nauseated by its overwhelming stench. Nauseated characters suffer -3 to attack throws and damage rolls for 1d4+4 rounds after leaving the dragon’s vicinity.
Invulnerable: The dragon’s innate power protects it from most attacks. The dragon cannot be harmed by non-magical weapons. 
Massive Size: The dragon is of enormous size for its age. Its Hit Dice are increased by 2, with a commensurate increase in damage from its claw and bite attacks and breath weapon. A dragon may take this special ability multiple times, representing a truly colossal specimen. Venerable dragons attack for 3d6/3d6/6d8 if this special ability is taken once and for 3d8/3d8/6d10 if the special ability is taken twice.
Paralyzing Blows: The dragon’s claw and bite attacks channel negative energy that causes paralysis for 3d4 turns unless a successful Saving Throw versus Paralysis is made. This effect is otherwise identical to a ghoul’s paralysis. Only chaotic dragons may have this special ability.
Poisonous Blood: Any opponent successfully hitting the dragon in melee must save versus Poison to avoid being splashed with highly venomous blood. A failed saving throw results in death. 
Polymorph Self: The dragon may change its shape to any humanoid or animal form at will. Only dragons capable of casting spells may have this special ability. 
Tail Lash: The dragon may make one additional melee attack each round, lashing out with its tail at targets to its rear. The dragon inflicts the same damage with its tail attack as it does with its bite attack.
Wing Claws: The dragon may make two additional melee attacks each round with the claws on its wings. When attacking with its wings, the dragon inflicts the claw damage of a dragon of its own age category.

Sleeping Dragons
When a dragon is encountered in its lair, or otherwise in a location on the ground, there is a chance that the dragon will be asleep when stumbled across. Dragons are an ancient, long-lived race, and as such they operate on a different schedule than humanoids. Dragons may sleep in a safe location for days, weeks, or sometimes years if left undisturbed. However, despite sleeping more often, older, wiser dragons generally take precautions against being caught unawares. The percentage chance that a dragon will be caught asleep when found is provided on the Secondary Dragon Attributes table. If the dragon is found asleep, opponents may attack the sleeping dragon for one round with a bonus of +2 to all attack throws. Thieves may backstab a sleeping dragon. The dragon will be roused after this round regardless of whether any attacks actually make contact, and combat will progress on the second round as normal. 
Dragon Speech Capability
The older the dragon, the greater the probability that it has the capability of speech. All dragons that can speak know Common, Draconic, and one other language. Dragons that speak may also cast arcane spells. Such dragons should be counted as having one additional special ability for purposes of XP. (This is already factored into the XP awards for Ancient and Venerable dragons, which always can speak and cast spells). 
Refer to the Secondary Dragon Attributes table for the probability of speech and the spells per day available for dragons of various ages. Dragons always know the same number of arcane spells that they can cast per day. Different dragons favor different types of spells, but charm person, invisibility, mirror image, and haste are common.  
Dragon Interaction
Because of their long history, dragons seldom take notice of the lesser insignificant intelligent races, and view them as primitive upstarts. Nonetheless, dragons are extremely intelligent and value their own lives. To this end, dragons will bargain and even surrender to characters to save their lives or otherwise richly benefit. Dragons have immense egos, and even the most evil dragon may stop to listen to the pleas or praise of a soon to be lunch. 
Dragons of differing alignment will interact with other intelligent creatures in different ways. Neutral dragons may or may not converse with characters, depending on the circumstances. Lawful dragons are more likely to aid a good party or a party on a noble mission. Chaotic dragons will likely attempt to destroy a party on sight unless there is something to be gained by exercising restraint.
Adventurers may use incapacitating attacks (see Special Maneuvers in Chapter 6) to attempt to capture a dragon, or other methods of the adventurers’ devising.  If the dragon is successfully captured, the adventurers may choose to enslave the dragon or sell it to a buyer. An enslaved dragon becomes a henchman to the character that enslaved it, but will always wish for its freedom. An enslaved dragon must make a Henchman Loyalty roll any time it has the opportunity to escape or betray its master. Apply the dragon’s normal morale bonus as a penalty to this roll. 
Alternatively, a live dragon may be sold in a Class I or II market for a number of gold pieces equal to 1,000 x the dragon’s total hit points.
Encountering Multiple Dragons
If two dragons are encountered, they will be a mated pair (if adult or older) or siblings (if juvenile or younger). If three or more dragons are encountered, they will be a mated pair (adults or older) along with their offspring (juvenile or younger). Roll separately for treasure for each dragon based on its age.

Sea Dragons
Dragons that lair in oceans or lakes may lose the ability to fly but gain the ability to breathe underwater and swim at a rate of 240’ (80’). These dragons stay almost exclusively in the water, but may glide over the surface of water for a duration of 6 rounds. These dragons live in underwater caverns where they hoard treasure from sunken vessels. They will never be found asleep above water.

Dragon Turtle
% In Lair:	5%
Dungeon Enc:	None
Wilderness Enc:	Solitary (1) / Lair (1)
Alignment:	Chaotic
Movement:	30’ (10’)
Swim:		90’ (30’)
Armor Class:	11
Hit Dice:		30*
Attacks:		3 (2 claws, bite)
Damage:	1d8/1d8/1d6x10
Save:		F15
Morale:		+2
Treasure Type:	R, N
XP:		9,500
This fearsome, massive beast is a magical hybrid of dragon and giant turtle. It has the large shell of a turtle, but the arms, legs, head, and tail of a dragon. A dragon turtle’s rough, deep green shell is much the same color as the deep water the monster favors, and the silver highlights that line the shell resemble light dancing on open water. The turtle’s legs, tail, and head are a lighter green, flecked with golden highlights. The lair of these creatures will always be below water in submerged caverns, where they hoard wealth from ships that have sunk to the bottom of the sea. Dragon turtles have powerful claw and bite attacks, and also have a breath weapon that is usable 3 times per day. The breath weapon is a hot blistering steam cloud 90’ long and 30’ wide that inflicts 30d6 points of damage. A victim may save versus Breath for half damage.

Dwarf
% In Lair:	50%
Dungeon Enc:	Squad (1d6) / Redoubt (1 company)
Wilderness Enc:	Company (1d12 squads) / Vault (1d10 companies)	
Alignment:	Lawful, Neutral
Movement:	60’ (20’)
Armor Class:	5
Hit Dice:		1
Attacks:		1 (weapon)
Damage:	1d8 or weapon
Save:		D1
Morale:		0
Treasure Type:	D (per company)
XP:		10
Dwarves are short, stout demi-humans that average 4’ tall but weigh as much as adult humans. Their skin can be very dark, but it is always some shade of tan or brown. Hair color can be black, gray, or brown. Dwarves favor earth tones in their clothing and prefer simple and functional garb. They typically wear chainmail armor with half helms and favor battle axes, warhammers, and crossbows. Goblins are the most reviled creatures to dwarves; dwarves will attack goblins first and ask questions later.
Each company of dwarves will be led by a dwarven vaultguard of level 1d4+1.  The leader may possess magic items in addition to any held by the company. For each category of item except rods/staffs/wands and scrolls, there is a 5% chance per level of the leader that he possesses an item of that category. In the presence of their leader, dwarves have morale of +2 rather than 0. 
Dwarven vaults will be ruled by a vaultlord (dwarven vaultguard of 9th level). The vaultlord will be accompanied by an elite guard of 2d6 vaultguards of level 1d4+1. There is a 50% chance a dwarven craftpriest of level 6+1d2 will be present to advise the vaultlord. Each of these NPCs may possess individual magic items, as described above. There is a 60% chance the vault will be protected by trained animals, either 5d4 war dogs or 2d4 brown bears. Dwarven vaults will have adult noncombatants and young equal to 50% and 25% of the number of able-bodied adults respectively.

Efreeti
% In Lair:	None
Dungeon Enc:	Solitary (1)
Wilderness Enc:	Solitary (1)
Alignment:	Chaotic
Movement:	90’ (30’)
	Fly:	240’ (80’)
Armor Class:	6
Hit Dice:		10***
Attacks:		1
Damage:	2d8
Save:		F15
Morale:		+4
Treasure Type:	None
XP:		2,950
Although they look like giant, demonic beings, efreet are actually an intelligent kind of fire elemental. They may only be affected by magic and magical weapons. Efreet have several spell-like abilities, each useable 3 times per day. They have four creation abilities, including create food and water (cast as a cleric of 7th level), create temporary objects of metal (the softer the metal the longer it lasts, gold lasts 24 hours while iron lasts 1 round, 10 stone maximum), create permanent goods (items made of wood, rope, and other kinds of softer goods of 10 stone maximum), and create illusion (as the spell phantasmal force but including both sight and sound, with an the effect that is permanent until touched or dispelled). Efreet can also make themselves invisible and make a wall of fire. They can become a flame pillar that inflicts 1d8 points of damage each round to characters within 5’, and ignites combustible materials. The efreeti may still attack and use its other powers when taking the form of a flame pillar, but this form may only be maintained by an efreeti for 3 rounds. Efreet may grant up to 3 wishes every 101 days, but always loathe doing so because they are held accountable for the deed when they return to their home plane.  
Whether asked to grant wishes or perform other services, efreet resent being summoned, and though they must serve for 101 days when properly compelled, they will attempt to twist the meaning of their orders and obey them only to the letter. Efreet are enemies of djinn, and will try to destroy them when encountered.

Elemental
		Air		Earth
% In Lair:	None		None
Dungeon Enc:	Solitary (1)	Solitary (1)
Wilderness Enc:	Solitary (1)	Solitary (1)
Alignment:	Neutral		Neutral
Movement:	- 		60’ (20)’
	Fly:	360’ (120’)	-
Armor Class:	7/9/11		7/9/11
Hit Dice:	8/12/16*	8/12/16*
Attacks:	See below	See below
Damage:	     	1d8 or 2d8 or 3d8
Save:		F8 or F12 or F16
Morale:		+4		+4
Treasure Type:	None		None
XP:		1,100/2,100/3,300
		Fire		Water
% In Lair:	None		None
Dungeon Enc:	Solitary (1)	Solitary (1)
Wilderness Enc:	Solitary (1)	Solitary (1)
Alignment:	Neutral		Neutral
Movement:	120’ (40)’	60’ (20’)
	Swim:	-		180’ (60’)
Armor Class:	7/9/11		7/9/11
Hit Dice:	8/12/16*	8/12/16*
Attacks:	See below	See below
Damage:	     	1d8 or 2d8 or 3d8
Save:		F8 or F12 or F16
Morale:		+4		+4
Treasure Type:	None		None
XP:		1,100/2,100/3,300
Elementals are living beings made up of one of the four primary elements. They may be summoned in three different ways, either by staff, miscellaneous magic item, or spell. Once summoned, elementals will leave when dispelled, destroyed, or ordered to depart by the summoner. However an elemental is summoned, the summoner must completely concentrate on directing the elemental or lose control. If the summoner stops concentrating or loses concentration due to being struck or taking other actions, the elemental will attack him and anyone in-between it and the summoner. Once the summoner has lost control of an elemental, he can no longer order it to depart. 
There are three different power levels of elementals, and the type present will be determined by the means used to summon them. Any elemental summoned with a staff is the weakest of the three, having AC 7, HD 8, and Dmg 1d8. Any elemental summoned with other miscellaneous magic items has AC 9, HD 12, and Dmg 2d8. Elementals summoned with a spell have AC 11, HD 16, and Dmg 3d8. All three types of elementals are immune to non-magical weapons.
Air Elementals: Air elementals appear as a twirling air mass. For every Hit Die possessed by an air elemental, it will have a diameter of ½’ and be 2’ high. For instance, an air elemental summoned by a spell would be 32’ high and have a diameter of 8’. If a being of fewer than 2 Hit Dice is caught in the twirling mass, it is carried away, barring a successful saving throw versus Death. Such creatures are helpless until the elemental is killed. Air elementals inflict an extra 1d8 points of damage when they successfully hit flying opponents. 
Earth Elementals: Earth elementals appear as giant humanoids made of earth. For every Hit Die possessed by an earth elemental, it will be 1’ high. For instance, an earth elemental summoned by a spell would be 16’ high. Earth elementals inflict an extra 1d8 points of damage when they successfully hit opponents standing on the ground. Earth elementals are unable to move through water that has a width greater than an elemental’s height.
Fire Elementals: Fire elementals appear as giant pillars of flame. For every Hit Die possessed by a fire elemental, it will have a diameter of 1’ and be 1’ high. For instance, a fire elemental summoned by a spell would be 16’ high and have a 16’ diameter. Fire elementals inflict an extra 1d8 points of damage when they successfully hit opponents that use cold-based attacks. Fire elementals are unable to move through water that has a width greater than an elemental’s diameter.
Water Elementals: Water elementals appear as a large mass of watery waves. For every Hit Die possessed by a water elemental, it will have a diameter of 2’ and be ½’ high. For instance, a water elemental summoned by a spell would be 8’ high and have a 32’ diameter. Water elementals inflict an extra 1d8 points of damage when they successfully hit opponents standing or submerged in water. Water elementals may not be further than 60’ from a source of water.

Elephant
% In Lair:	None
Dungeon Enc:	None 
Wilderness Enc:	Herd (1d20)
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	120’ (40’)
Armor Class:	4
Hit Dice:		9
Attacks:		2 or 1 (2 tusks or trample)
Damage:	2d4/2d4 or 4d8
Save:		F5
Morale:		0
Treasure Type:	Special
XP:		700
Massive herbivores of tropical lands, elephants are unpredictable creatures, but nevertheless are sometimes used as mounts or beasts of burden. When in close combat, they may attempt to attack with tusks or attempt to trample. Elephants have a +4 to their attack throw when attempting to trample an opponent that is man-sized or smaller. When distance permits, elephants may charge with their tusk attacks to deal double damage. Although elephants do not keep treasure, the ivory from tusks is valuable. Each tusk is worth 1d6x100gp.

Elf
% In Lair:	10%
Dungeon Enc:	Fellowship (1d4) / Haven (1 company)
Wilderness Enc:	Company (1d10 fellowships) / Fastness (1d10 companies)
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	120’ (40’)
Armor Class:	4
Hit Dice:		1 + 1
Attacks:		1 (weapon)
Damage:	1d8 or weapon
Save:		E1
Morale:		0
Treasure Type:	E (per company)
XP:		15
Elves are beautiful demi-humans that average 5 ½’ tall, with lithe builds and graceful features. Elves are ageless, always appearing in the prime of life, and can live for upwards of two centuries if not slain in battle. Their skin is always fair, while their hair color ranges from blue-black to platinum, and their eyes are amber, blue, golden, hazel, or violet. Elves prefer colorful clothes, usually with a green-and-gray cloak that blends well with the colors of the forest. They typically arm themselves with lightweight chainmail, shields, delicately curved swords, and composite bows. 
Each company of elves will be led by an elven spellsword of level 1d6+1. The leader may possess magic items in addition to any held by the company. For each category of item (potion, sword, etc.), there is a 5% chance per level of the leader that he possesses an item of that category. In the presence of the leader, elves have morale of +2 rather than 0. 
Elven fastnesses (wilderness lairs) will be ruled by a wizard-lord (elven spellsword of 9th level). The wizard-lord will be accompanied by an elite guard of 2d6 spellswords of level 1d6+1. There is a 50% chance an elven nightblade of level 6+1d2 will be in the service of the wizard-lord. Each of these NPCs may possess individual magic items, as described above. There is a 70% chance the fastness will be protected by 2d6 trained giant hawks. Elven fastnesses will have adult noncombatants and young equal to 100% and 5% of the number of able-bodied adults respectively.

Ettin
% In Lair:	20%
Dungeon Enc:	Gang (1d2) / Lair (1d4)
Wilderness Enc:	Warband (1d4) / Lair (1d4)
Alignment:	Chaotic
Movement:	120’ (40’)
Armor Class:	6
Hit Dice:		10
Attacks:		2 (club, club)
Damage:	2d8/3d6
Save:		F10
Morale:		+1
Treasure Type:	N, H
XP:		850
Ettins are large, nocturnal creatures that live below ground. They share some affinity to orcs, witnessed in their pig-like faces, but possess a pair of grotesque heads, each of which controls one arm. The right side is slightly dominant, and can cause 3d6 points of damage whereas the left can inflict 2d8. Ettins gain a +1 bonus to surprise rolls because one head or the other is usually keeping watch. Ettins are dirty creatures that wear tattered skins and often use wicked weapons, such as barbed clubs.

Faerie
		Pixie				Sprite
% In Lair:	5%				30%
Dungeon Enc:	Flight (2d4) / Lair (1d4x10)	None
Wilderness Enc:	Wing (1d4x10) / Lair (1d4x10)	Wing (3d6) / Lair (3d6)
Alignment: 	Neutral	      	     		Neutral
Movement:	90’ (30’)			60’
           Fly: 180’ (60’)			180’ (60’)
Armor Class:	6    				4*
Hit Dice:	1*				1d4 hit points
Attacks:	1 (dagger)			1 (spell)
Damage:		1d4				See below
Save:		E1				E1
Morale:		-1				-1
Treasure Type:	B				B
XP:	 	13				6
Pixie: These 2’ tall creatures resemble elves, save for their insect-like wings. These wings are relatively weak, and a pixie must spend 1 turn on its feet for each 3 turns spent flying. Pixies are naturally invisible, but may choose to become visible at will. The spell detect invisibility will reveal their presence. Pixie invisibility is unlike the spell of the same name in that a pixie may act freely, including attacking, without becoming visible. Because of this advantage, a pixie will always get surprise on its opponent. An opponent cannot attack a pixie during the first round they are engaged in combat, but in the second round an opponent may strike due to hearing the pixie and otherwise having some idea where it might be as it moves. 
Sprite: Sprites are reclusive fey creatures that are cousins to elves and pixies. They appear as 1’ tall, winged elves. Sprites are not malicious, but are mischievous, and enjoy playing tricks on other creatures. When five sprites pool their energies, they may inflict a curse upon a target. A curse will not be directed to cause physical harm or illness, but will instead be embarrassing or of some other “humorous” nature. Examples might include making a character’s skin change to be dotted or striped, or some other effect left to the Judge’s discretion. The spell remove curse can counter this effect.

Fish, Giant
		Catfish			Piranha
% In Lair:	None			None
Dungeon Enc:	None			None
Wilderness Enc:	School (1d2)		Pack (2d4)
Alignment:	Neutral			Neutral
Movement:	
	Swim:	90’ (30’)		150’ (50’)
Armor Class:	5			3
Hit Dice:	8			3 + 3
Attacks:	5 (bite, 4 feelers)	1 (bite)
Damage:		2d8/1d4 (each 1d8 feeler)
Save:		F4			F2
Morale:		0			-1
Treasure Type:	None			None
XP:		600			65
		Rockfish		Sturgeon
% In Lair:	None			None
Dungeon Enc:	None			None
Wilderness Enc:	School (2d4)		Solitary (1)
Alignment:	Neutral			Neutral
Movement:	
	Swim:	180’ (60’)		180’ (60’)
Armor Class:	2			9
Hit Dice:	5 + 5*			10*
Attacks:	4 (spines)		1 (bite)
Damage:		1d4x4 (each 2d10 spine), poison
Save:		F3		 	 F5
Morale:		0			 +1
Treasure Type:	None			 I
XP:		460			 1,550
Giant Catfish: These scaleless, ash-colored fish are both predators and scavengers. They can attack with their whisker-like feelers and a bite. The giant catfish reaches a length of about 15’.
Giant Piranha: These giant fish live in warm, moving water, and can reach a length of 5’. They will attack nearly anything that moves, and if blood is scented they will feed at a feverish pace, never having to check for morale. Note that as many as 8 giant piranhas may attack a single victim at a time.
Giant Rockfish: These giant fish are passive but deadly. They closely resemble the rocky sea surface that they call home, and blend in well since there is only a 30% chance that an observer will recognize the fish is present. The giant rockfish will attack if threatened. Its deadly spines are poisonous, requiring a saving throw versus Poison to avoid death. Should a being touch a rockfish due to mistaking it for its surroundings, it is struck by all four spines with no attack throw required.
Giant Sturgeon: These immense gray scaly fish can reach a length of 30’. Giant sturgeons are able to swallow whole creatures of up to man size on an unmodified attack throw of 18 or greater. A creature that is swallowed whole takes 2d6 points of damage per round inside the giant sturgeon’s belly until either the fish is killed or the creature dies. In addition, each round the swallowed creature must make a successful saving throw versus Paralysis or be paralyzed. If the swallowed creature is armed with a sharp weapon and has not been paralyzed, it may attack the sturgeon from the inside with a -4 to the attack throw versus an effective AC 2. Should the swallowed creature die and remain in the sturgeon’s belly for 6 turns, it is irrecoverably digested. Because of their propensity to swallow creatures whole, any encounter with giant sturgeons may yield treasure, whether wandering or in lair. The treasure (if any) is always found inside the creature’s belly.

Fly, Giant Carnivorous
% In Lair:	35%
Dungeon Enc:	Scourge (1d6) / Nest (2d6)
Wilderness Enc:	Swarm (2d6) / Nest (2d6)
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	90’ (30’)
	Fly:	180’ (60’)
Armor Class:	3
Hit Dice:		2
Attacks:		1 (bite)
Damage:	1d8
Save:		F1
Morale:		0
Treasure Type:	C
XP:		20
The dreaded giant carnivorous fly is 3’ long. They have markings that make them appear similar to giant killer bees. The giant carnivorous fly preys upon these bees and is immune to their poisonous sting. However, they also prey upon animals and humanoids. These giant flies skulk in shadows, waiting for victims. Characters encountering carnivorous flies suffer a -2 penalty to surprise rolls. These carnivorous flies sometimes jump to a distance of 30’ to attack. They attack by biting victims with their formidable mandibles. 

Gargoyle
% In Lair:	20%
Dungeon Enc:	Flight (1d6) / Lair (2d4)
Wilderness Enc:	Wing (2d4) / Lair (2d4)
Alignment:	Chaotic
Movement:	90’ (30’)
	Fly:	150’ (50’)
Armor Class:	4
Hit Dice:		4*
Attacks:		4 (2 claws, bite, horn)
Damage:	1d3/1d3/1d6/1d4
Save:		F8
Morale:		+3
Treasure Type:	H
XP:		135
Gargoyles are demonic-appearing magical constructs. They are immune to poison and sleep, charm, and hold spells, and may only be harmed by enchanted weapons or magic. They have large bat-like wings, horns, fangs, fearsome claws, and skin the color of gray stone. Although they are not highly intelligent, they make up for this with the sly nature of efficient predators.

Gelatinous Cube
% In Lair:	None
Dungeon Enc:	Solitary (1)
Wilderness Enc:	None
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	60’ (20’)
Armor Class:	1
Hit Dice:		4*
Attacks:		1
Damage:	2d4 + see below
Save:		F2
Morale:		N/A
Treasure Type:	C
XP:		135
The nearly transparent gelatinous cube travels slowly along dungeon corridors and cave floors, absorbing carrion, creatures, and trash. A typical gelatinous cube is 10’ on a side and weighs 15,000lb, though much larger specimens are not unknown. The translucent appearance of the gelatinous cube means characters suffer a -2 penalty to avoid being surprised by them. 
A gelatinous cube attacks by slamming its body into its prey. This attack deals 2d4 points of damage, and an opponent must succeed in a saving throw versus Paralysis or become paralyzed for 2d4 turns. The spell cure light wounds causes a character to regain movement, but this use does not heal hit points with the same casting. Subsequent attacks against a paralyzed foe always hit. Gelatinous cubes are immune to the effects of lightning-based and cold-based attacks. They take normal damage from weapons and fire-based attacks.
Inorganic material remains trapped and visible inside the cube’s body. As a result, any encounter with a gelatinous cube may yield treasure, even though the creature has no lair. The treasure (if any) is always floating in its body, along with bits of bone, stone, and metal.

Ghoul
% In Lair:	20%
Dungeon Enc:	Pack (1d6) / Lair (2d8)
Wilderness Enc:	Horde (2d8) / Lair (2d8)
Alignment:	Chaotic
Movement:	90’ (30’)
Armor Class:	3
Hit Dice:		2*
Attacks:		3 (2 claws, bite)
Damage:	1d3/1d3/1d3 + see below
Save:		F2
Morale:		+1
Treasure Type:	D
XP:		29
Formerly human, but now flesh-eating undead mockeries of their former existence, ghouls are fearsome enemies of all things living. Ghouls attack with claws and a vile bite. Any successful attack requires the opponent to attempt a saving throw versus Paralysis, or become paralyzed for 2d4 turns. This paralysis may be cured with cure light wounds. Elves are immune to the paralysis of ghouls, and the paralysis cannot take effect on humanoids larger than ogres. Ghouls will attempt to paralyze all members of a group, so that they can feast on their helpless bodies at leisure. All humans slain by ghouls rise again in 24 hours as ghouls, unless the spell bless is cast upon their bodies. Like all undead, ghouls are immune to sleep, charm, and hold spells and poison.

Giant
			Hill				Stone				Frost
% In Lair:		25%				25%				30%
Dungeon Enc:		Gang (1d4), Lair (2d4)		Gang (1d2) / Lair (1d6)		Gang (1d2) / Lair (1d4)
Wilderness Enc:		Warband (2d4), Lair (2d4)    	Warband (1d6) / Lair (1d6)	Warband (1d4) / Lair (1d6)
Alignment: 		Chaotic	       	    		Neutral	      	     		Chaotic
Movement:		120’ (40’)			120’ (40’)			120’ (40’)
Armor Class:		5    				5    				5
Hit Dice:		8				9				10
Attacks:		1				1				1
Damage:			2d8				3d6				4d6
Save:			F8				F9				F10
Morale:			0				+1				+1
Treasure Type:		N				N				N
XP:	 		600				700				850

			Fire				Cloud				Storm
% In Lair:		35%				40%				45%
Dungeon Enc:		Gang (1d2) / Lair (1d3)		Gang (1d2) / Lair (1d3)		Solitary (1) / Lair (1d3)
Wilderness Enc:		Warband (1d3) / Lair (1d3)	Warband (1d3) / Lair (1d3)	Warband (1d3) / Lair (1d3)
Alignment: 		Chaotic	      	     		Neutral	      	     		Lawful
Movement:		120’ (40’)			120’ (40’)			150’ (50’)
Armor Class:		5    				5    				7
Hit Dice:		11				12				15
Attacks:		1				1				1 + see below
Damage:			5d6				6d6				8d6
Save:			F11				F12				F15
Morale:			+1				+2				+2
Treasure Type:		N				N				N, H
XP:	 		1,000				1,200				1,800
Hill Giant: In many ways hill giants resemble larger ogres, including having eyes rimmed with red and often wielding some bludgeoning weapon or a spear. Like others of their kind, hill giants can throw rocks dealing 3d6 points of damage to a range of 200’. They have skin of rust brown or tan, with similarly colored rust or black hair, and dress in the skins of animals. They stand 12’ tall and weigh about 1,100lb. Hill giants enjoy pillaging human villages.
Stone Giant: Stone giants are partially named for their stone-like complexions and iron colored eyes. Their hair is also dark-stone colored, sometimes with hints of blue. They are 14’ tall and about 1,500lb. Whereas hill giants often use wooden clubs, stone giants prefer stone clubs and wear skins the color of stone. Stone giants are the best rock-throwers of all giants, able to hurl rocks inflicting 3d6 points of damage to a range of 300’. They may keep guards (50% chance), typically 1d4 cave bears.
Frost Giant: Frost giants have the overall appearance of massive 18’ tall muscled barbarians, weighing about 2,800lb. They have pale yellow or blue eyes, with white hair that can likewise be tinged with yellow or blue. Frost giants get their name for their love of the cold. They often live within frosty caverns, but have the propensity to take up residence in castles, as do some of their other giant kin. This love of the cold is reflected in the fact that frost giants are completely immune to ill effects from cold, including the bone-chilling breath of white dragons! Frost giants can throw rocks dealing 3d6 points of damage to a range of 200’. Frost giant lairs are always guarded by trained animals, usually (1-8 on 1d10) 6d6 dire wolves, but sometimes (9-10 on 1d10) 3d6 polar bears.
Fire Giant: Fire giants’ hair is the red and orange color of flames, and their skin is soot black. Their teeth are flame orange, and their eyes red. They are 16’ tall and weigh 3,200lb. They commonly wear armor on their broad shoulders. This armor is usually brass, bronze, copper, or sometimes made from the skin of red dragons. Fire giants live in castles or large structures made of stone or dense fire-hardened earth. Like all giants, fire giants delight in throwing rocks at enemies. They can hit a target from a distance of 200’ to inflict 3d6 points of damage. When not throwing rocks, fire giants wield large swords. Fire giants are immune to fire-based attacks, including the fire breath of a red dragon. Fire giant lairs are always guarded by trained monsters, usually  (1-8 on 1d10) 3d6 hellhounds, but sometimes by (9-10 on 1d10) 1d3 hydras.
Cloud Giant: Cloud giants often dress in flowing clothing and fancy jewelry. They have bronze to white hair, with skin in tones of blue ranging from nearly white to cold, light blue. They are 20’ tall and weigh about 7,000lb. Cloud giants usually live in giant castles at high elevations. When not high up in the mountains, their castles exist on clouds given substance by magic. Their strong olfactory sense and sharp eyesight gives them a +1 bonus to surprise rolls. Although they often wield clubs, all cloud giants can throw rocks to inflict 3d6 points of damage to a range of 200’. In addition, 5% of cloud giants have Mage abilities at level 2d4. Cloud giants protect their lairs with various guard animals, depending on the location of the lair. If the giants are living on clouds the guards will be 3d6 giant hawks, while if living in mountain castles, the guards will be dire wolves (6d6 in number).
Storm Giant: Storm giants are the most formidable of all giants. They live in remote locations; about 60% of the time they live on clouds like their cloud giant cousins, and 30% of the time in the mountains like their stone giant relatives. Somewhat more rarely, 10% of the time storm giants choose to live underwater. Storm giants who dwell under water have green hair, eyes and skin; the more common surface dwellers have purple skin, purple or cloud gray eyes, and blue-tinted black hair. Both kinds are 22’ tall and 12,000lb. In all cases, they live in immense, luxurious castles. Storm giants have the ability to summon thunderstorms that will arrive after 1 turn. In the presence of a thunderstorm, a storm giant is able to cast a lightning bolt once every 5 rounds. The lightning bolt will inflict 15d6 points of damage; a saving throw versus Blast can reduce this damage by 50%. Storm giants are immune to all forms of lightning, even the lightning breath weapon of blue dragons. 10% of storm giants have Mage abilities at level 2d6. Like most other giants, storm giants protect their lairs with trained creatures of various types. If living above water, the guards will be 2d4 griffons. Storm giants who have their castle abodes under water will instead have 3d6 giant crabs.

Gnoll
% In Lair:	20%
Dungeon Enc:	Gang (1d6) / Lair (1 warband)
Wilderness Enc:	Warband (1d6 gangs) / Village (1d10 warbands)
Alignment:	Chaotic
Movement:	90’ (30’)
Armor Class:	4
Hit Dice:		2
Attacks:		1 (weapon)
Damage:	2d4 or weapon +1
Save:		F2
Morale:		0
Treasure Type:	G (per warband)
XP:		20
Gnolls are wandering chaotic beastmen bred from gnome and troll stock by the ancient Zaharans during the Empyrean War. An adult gnoll is about 7-1/2’ tall and 300lb. Most gnolls have dirty yellow or reddish-brown fur. A gnoll is a nocturnal carnivore, preferring intelligent creatures for food because they scream more, though gnolls themselves are not particularly intelligent. Gnolls wear leather or piecemeal armors, and favor polearms, two-handed swords, battle axes, and morning stars for melee. They are savvy archers, preferring long bows for ranged fire. They receive a +1 bonus to damage rolls due to their high strength. 
Each gnoll gang will be led by a champion with AC5, 3 Hit Dice, 16 hit points, and a +2 bonus to damage rolls from strength. Each gnoll warband will be led by a sub-chieftain with AC6, 4 Hit Dice, 20 hit points, and a +2 bonus to damage rolls. A gnoll lair or village will be led by a chieftain with AC7, 6 Hit Dice, 28 hit points, and a +3 bonus to damage rolls. As long as the chieftain is alive, the gnolls will gain a +1 to morale rolls. Gnoll lairs and villages will have females and young equal to 50% and 200% of the number of males, respectively. Female gnolls fight as orcs, but young never fight (1hp each).
When gnolls are encountered in a village, certain additional creatures will be present. Gnolls take captives for food or slave labor, so there will be 1 prisoner for every 10 gnolls in the village. There is a 33% chance a gnoll village will be guarded by 1d3 trolls guards and another 66% chance for 4d4 trained hyenas. In addition, a village has a 60% chance of a shaman being present, and a 50% chance of a witch doctor.  A shaman is equivalent to sub-chieftain statistically, but has Clerical abilities at level 1d4+1. A witch doctor is equivalent to a champion statistically, but has Mage abilities at level 1d4. 

Gnome
% In Lair:	50%
Dungeon Enc:	Squad (1d8) / Redoubt (1 company) 
Wilderness Enc:	Company (1d10 squads) / Vault (1d10 companies)
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	60’ (20’)
Armor Class:	4
Hit Dice:		1
Attacks:		1 (weapon)
Damage:	1d6 or weapon
Save:		D1
Morale:		0
Treasure Type:	D (per company)
XP:		10
Gnomes are rare humanoids that stand 3’ to 3 ½’ tall and are slighter of build than dwarves. They are believed to be the outcome of dwarven and elven crossbreeding in the distant past. Their skin color ranges from dark tan to woody brown, while their hair is fair, noses large, and eyes any shade of blue. Gnome males prefer long beards. Gnomes generally wear leather or earth tones, though they decorate their clothes with intricate stitching or fine jewelry. These cousins to dwarves share many of their likes, and often live in vast mines looking for precious metals and gems. Their tendency to underground life has granted them extended infravision to 90’. They have a fondness for contraptions, and often employ crossbows and fight hand-to-hand with war hammers. Gnomes have a particular hatred for kobolds, but are none too fond of goblins. Dwarves, however, are treated as welcome relatives. Elves see gnomes as something of an embarrassment, while gnomes frequently attempt to impress their aristocratic cousins. 
Each gnome squad will have a leader with 2 Hit Dice and has 11 hit points. Each gnome company will have a sub-chieftain with 3 Hit Dice and 1d4+9 hit points. A gnome redoubt or vault will be ruled by a grand chief. The grand chief is a particularly strong gnome, with 4 Hit Dice, 18 hit points, and a +1 bonus on damage rolls. As long as the grand chief is alive, the gnomes will gain a +2 bonus on morale rolls.
When gnomes are encountered in a vault, the grand chief will be accompanied by a small contingent of 1d6 bodyguards. The bodyguards are equivalent to a sub-chieftain statistically. Gnome vaults will have noncombatant adults and young equal to 50% and 25% of the number of able-bodied adults respectively.

Goblin
% In Lair:	40%
Dungeon Enc:	Gang (2d4) / Lair (1 warband)
Wilderness Enc:	Warband (2d6 gangs) / Village (1d10 warbands)
Alignment:	Chaotic
Movement:	60’ (20’)
Armor Class:	3
Hit Dice:		1 - 1
Attacks:		1 (weapon)
Damage:	1d6 or weapon
Save:		0 level human
Morale:		-1
Treasure Type:	E (per warband)
XP:		5
Goblins are repellent beastmen bred from dwarves and gnolls by the ancient Zaharans. Goblins stand 3’ to 3 ½’ tall, with surprisingly strong, wiry builds.  Their eyes are usually dull and glazed, varying in color from red to yellow, and sometimes flicker red in the dark. Goblins’ skin color ranges from yellow through any shade of orange to a deep red; usually all members of a single tribe are about the same color. They spend most of their days underground, and as such suffer a -1 penalty to all attack throws when in full sunlight, but have a longer range of infravision, to 90’. Goblins are archenemies of dwarves, who they hate above all other humanoids, followed closely by their distaste for gnomes. Goblins typically wear drab, patchy leather armor and fight with spears, short swords, and slings. 
Each goblin gang will be led by a champion with AC4, 1 Hit Die, and 7 hit points. Each goblin warband will be led by a sub-chieftain with AC5, 1+1 Hit Die, 9 hit points, and a +1 bonus to damage rolls. A goblin lair or village will be led by a chieftain with AC6, 3 Hit Dice, 16 hit points, and a +2 bonus to damage rolls from strength. As long as the chieftain is alive, the goblins will gain a +2 to morale rolls.  Goblin lairs and villages will have females and young equal to 60% and 100% of the number of males respectively, neither of which fight.
Goblins sometimes use dire wolves as mounts. Each gang encountered has a 5% chance to be mounted on dire wolves. Each warband encountered has a 20% chance to have ¼ of its gangs mounted on dire wolves. If a gang is mounted, its champion will also be mounted. If any gangs within a warband are mounted, the sub-chieftain will be mounted, and if any warbands within a lair or village are mounted, the chieftain will be mounted.
When goblins are encountered in a village, certain additional creatures may be present. There is a 60% chance a goblin village will be guarded by 5d6 dire wolves and another 20% chance that 2d6 bugbear mercenaries will be present. In addition, a village has a 75% chance of a shaman being present, and a 50% chance of a witch doctor. A shaman is equivalent to a sub-chieftain statistically, but has Clerical abilities at level 2d4. A witch doctor is equivalent to a champion statistically, but has Mage abilities at level 1d6. 

Golem
		Amber			Bone		
% In Lair:	None			None
Dungeon Enc:	Solitary (1)		Solitary (1)
Wilderness Enc:	Solitary (1)		Solitary (1)
Alignment:	Neutral			Neutral
Movement:	180’ (60’)		120’ (40’)
Armor Class:	3		     	7
Hit Dice:	10*			8*
Attacks:	3 (2 claws, bite)	4 (weapons)
Damage:		2d6/2d6/2d10		weapon type
Save:		F5			F4
Morale:		N/A			N/A
Treasure Type:	None			None
XP:		1,550			1,100
		Bronze			Wood
% In Lair:	None			None
Dungeon Enc:	Solitary (1)		Solitary (1)
Wilderness Enc:	Solitary (1)		Solitary (1)
Alignment:	Neutral			Neutral
Movement:	240’ (80’)		120’ (40’)
Armor Class:	9			2
Hit Dice:	20*			2 + 2*
Attacks:	1 (fist)		1 (fist)
Damage:		3d10			1d8
Save:		F10			F1
Morale:		N/A			N/A
Treasure Type:	None			None
XP:		4,600			47
Golems are magically created automatons of great power. Constructing one involves the employment of mighty magic. As such, they are created by exceptionally powerful clerics and mages. The examples provided here are just a few of the possible kinds. The Judge may design new forms using the examples as guidelines. All golems are unaffected by ordinary weapons. In addition, golems have no true intelligence, and are thus unaffected by hold, charm, or sleep spells. Since they are not truly alive, they are unaffected by poison or gases.
Amber Golem: These golems are made of petrified tree sap. This golden stone is commonly formed into the shape of dire wolves or large cats. They have the ability to detect invisibility to a range of 60’, and are able to track any being.
Bone Golem: Though they may be mistaken for undead, these human-sized constructs of bones are animated golems. These golems are usually given four arms, and each may wield a weapon to attack every round. They may direct attacks at up to two opponents each round. In addition to ordinary immunities enjoyed by golems, bone golems are unaffected by electrical, fire, or cold-based attacks.
Bronze Golem: These giant humanoids are made of bronze, and have molten metal inside them. Their powerful fists deal 3d10 points of damage. When a bladed weapon strikes a bronze golem, the attacker suffers 2d6 points of damage as some of the molten metal inside it gushes forth. A saving throw versus Breath can be made to avoid this damage entirely. 
Wood Golem: Wood golems are about the size of dwarves and are shaped from wood. They are clumsy and suffer -1 to initiative. These golems are particularly susceptible to fire-based attacks, and make saving throws against fire with a penalty of -2. In addition, fire attacks against them deal 1 more point of damage per damage die rolled.

Gorgon
% In Lair:	40%
Dungeon Enc:	Group (1d2) / Den (1d4)
Wilderness Enc:	Gang (1d4) / Den (1d4)
Alignment:	Chaotic
Movement:	120’ (40’)
Armor Class:	7
Hit Dice:		8**
Attacks:		1 (gore or breath)
Damage:	2d6 or petrify
Save:		F8
Morale:		0
Treasure Type:	K
XP:		1, 600
The gorgon resembles a large bull with metallic scales. A typical gorgon stands over 6’ tall at the shoulder and measures 8’ from snout to tail. It weighs about 4,000lb. Gorgons are exceptionally aggressive. They attack opponents on sight, attempting to gore or petrify them. When distance permits, gorgons may charge with their gore attack to deal double damage. Gorgons have a breath weapon that is a gas cloud 10’ wide and 60’ long. Any creature caught in this cloud must succeed in a saving throw versus Petrification or be turned to stone. A gorgon is unaffected by its own breath weapon. Gorgons live on hills and prairies, making their dens in caves or hidden dells. Any treasure in a gorgon den will be on petrified victims, and will only be accessible if the victims are restored to flesh. 

Gray Ooze
% In Lair:	None
Dungeon Enc:	Solitary (1)
Wilderness Enc:	Solitary (1)
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	10’ (3’)
       Burrow: 	10’ (3’)
Armor Class:	2
Hit Dice:		3*
Attacks:		1
Damage:	2d8
Save:		F2
Morale:		N/A
Treasure Type:	None
XP:		65
Gray ooze can grow to a diameter of up to 10’, and a thickness of about 6 inches. It resembles damp stone so closely that it can be mistaken for that easily. A gray ooze strikes like a snake, slamming opponents with its body. A successful strike to an unarmored being deals 2d8 points of damage from the acidic slime that covers it. Any non-magical armor or clothing is destroyed immediately after a successful hit from the ooze, as the acid eats through it viciously. A non-magical metal or wooden weapon that strikes gray ooze also dissolves immediately after dealing damage. Magical weapons, armor, and clothing are allowed a saving throw using the wearer's save versus Death, adding any magical bonus to the roll if applicable. Once it has hit, the ooze clings to an opponent and deals 2d8 points of damage every round until it can be neutralized.  Gray ooze is immune to the effects of fire-based and cold-based attacks, but takes normal damage from lightning-based attacks and weapons.

Green Slime
% In Lair:	None
Dungeon Enc:	Solitary (1)
Wilderness Enc:	None
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	3’ (1’)
Armor Class:	NA (always hit) 
Hit Dice:		2**
Attacks:		1
Damage:	See below
Save:		F1
Morale:		N/A
Treasure Type:	None
XP:		38
This animate, viscous green slime feeds on plants, animals, and metals, including weapons and armor, but does not digest stone. Green slime senses movements through subtle vibrations, and will drop from high places onto victims to feed, or will cling to an opponent who steps on it. Once covering a victim, green slime will digest all clothing and armor in 6 rounds.
 The slime feeds so quickly that after this period, in only 1d4 rounds after contacting an animal’s (or character’s!) bare skin, the slime will completely digest it, creating more slime in its place. No magical revival is possible for a victim as nothing material of the victim remains. Green slime is impervious to most attacks, but is susceptible to fire. The slime clings in such a way to make scraping it off ineffective. Note that if green slime is burned while it is on a character, the damage from the fire is divided evenly between the slime and the character. Green slime is killed instantly by a cure disease spell.

Griffon
% In Lair:	25%
Dungeon Enc:	None
Wilderness Enc:	Pride (2d8) / Aerie (2d8)
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	120’ (40’)
	Fly:	360’ (120’)
Armor Class:	4
Hit Dice:		7
Attacks:		3 (2 talons, bite)
Damage:	1d4/1d4/2d8
Save:		F4
Morale:		+1
Treasure Type:	P
XP:		440
Griffons are powerful, majestic creatures with the characteristics of both lions and eagles. Their rear body is that of a lion, while their front legs, head, and wings are from a giant eagle. Broad, golden wings emerge from the creature’s back and span 25’ or more. From nose to tail, an adult griffon can measure as much as 8’ and weigh 500lb. Griffons are fierce hunters with a taste for horse flesh. If a horse is within 120’ of a griffon, the griffon will automatically attack if it fails a morale roll. 
A flying griffon can make a dive attack with its talons, dealing double damage. If a griffon hits a creature smaller than itself with both its talons, the griffon grabs the creature struck unless it makes a saving throw versus Paralysis. Grabbed creatures of dwarf size or less may be carried off. 
When a griffon aerie is encountered, there is a 50% probability that 1d6 eggs or 1d4 young are present. Griffons are intensely protective of their young, and will attack any being that comes near. Griffon eggs or young may be captured to be raised and trained as mounts. Griffons can carry up to 45 stone (450lb) and move at full movement, or can carry a maximum of 90 stone (900lb) and have movement halved.

Halfling
% In Lair:	90%
Dungeon Enc:	Band (3d6) / Delving (1 meet)
Wilderness Enc:	Meet (1d4 bands) / Shire (1d10 meets)
Alignment:	Lawful
Movement:	90’ (30’)
Armor Class:	2
Hit Dice:		1 - 1
Attacks:		1 (weapon)
Damage:	1d6 or weapon
Save:		E1
Morale:		-1
Treasure Type:	D (per meet)
XP:		5
Halflings are a race of diminutive and insular humanoids noted for their love of food, wealth, and comfort and their dislike of big people, strangers, and travel. Descending from human and dwarven stock, they stand about 3’ tall, with ruddy skin, dark hair, and brown or black eyes.  Among the most hirsute of the humanoid races, halflings cultivate their body hair the way dwarves cultivate their beards. Well-groomed foot hair is the mark of a halfling of fine breeding. Halflings live in small, close-knit communities of hill burrows with big, round windows. These “halfling holes” are a compromise between a dwarven heritage that craves the security of thick earth overhead and a human bloodline clamoring for sun and space. 
Each halfling band will be led by a reeve with 2 Hit Dice. A halfling delving or shire will be led by a sheriff with 1d6+1 Hit Dice. When halfling are encountered in their shire (wilderness lair), additional creatures will be present. Each shire will have a militia consisting of 5d4 halflings of 2 Hit Dice each. Shires will also have adult noncombatants and young equal to 100% and 200% of the number of the number of able-bodied adults respectively. 

Harpy
% In Lair:	25%
Dungeon Enc:	Flight (1d6) / Nest (2d4)
Wilderness Enc:	Wing (2d4) / Nest (2d4)
Alignment:	Chaotic
Movement:	60’ (20’)
	Fly:	150’ (50’)
Armor Class:	2
Hit Dice:		3*
Attacks:		3 (2 claws, weapon, see below)
Damage:	1d4/1d4/1d6, see below
Save:		F6
Morale:		-1
Treasure Type:	E 
XP:		65
From the waist up these monsters resemble unsightly women, but they have the legs and wings of giant eagles. Harpies like to entrance hapless travelers with their magical songs and lead them to unspeakable torments. If a character hears this magical song, a saving throw versus Spells may be attempted, and failure indicates the victim has been charmed. A successful saving throw grants the character immunity to the effects of the song for the rest of the encounter. Any being under the charm of a harpy will attempt to move close to them, and will not make any attacks. Only when a harpy has finished playing with its new “toys” will it release them from suffering by killing and consuming them. 

Hawk
			Ordinary			Giant
% Lair:			20%				20%
Dungeon Enc:		None				None
Wilderness Enc.:	Flock (1d6) / Aerie (1d6)	Flock (1d3) / Aerie (1d3)
Alignment: 		Neutral	      	    		Neutral	    
Movement:		-				-
               Fly:	480’ (160’)			450’ (150’)
Armor Class:   		1    				3
Hit Dice:		1d4 hit points			3 + 3
Attacks:		2 (talons)			2 (talons)
Damage:			1d2/1d2				1d4/1d4
Save:			0 level human			F2
Morale:			-1				0
Treasure Type:		None				None
XP:	 		5				65
These predatory birds often glide through the air watching for prey. When a hawk aerie is encountered, there is a 50% chance that 1d6 eggs or 1d4 young are present. If eggs or young are captured, they can be raised and trained as hunters (if ordinary) or mounts (if giant).
Ordinary Hawks: These creatures are similar to eagles but slightly smaller: 1’ to 2’ long, with wingspans of 6’ or less. Unless trained, they will only attack small prey, such as dogs, rabbits, and similar animals. A hawk can make a dive attack with its talons, dealing double damage. If a hawk hits a creature smaller than itself with both its talons, the hawk grabs the creature struck unless it makes a saving throw versus Paralysis. Grabbed creatures of dwarf size or less may be carried off. 
Giant Hawks: Giant hawks range from 3’ to 5’ long and are capable of attacking larger prey of roughly human-sized or smaller. A giant hawk can make a dive attack with its talons, dealing double damage. If a giant hawk hits a creature smaller than itself with both its talons, the giant hawk grabs the creature struck unless it makes a saving throw versus Paralysis. Grabbed creatures of dwarf size or less may be carried off. Trained giant hawks are commonly used as guards in elven fastnesses. Giant hawks can carry up to 30 stone (300lb) and move at full movement, or can carry a maximum of 60 stone (600lb) and have movement halved.

Hell Hound
			Lesser				Greater
% In Lair:		30%				30%
Dungeon Enc:		Pack (2d4) / Den (2d4)		Pack (2d4) / Den (2d4)
Wilderness Enc:		Pack (2d4) / Den (2d4)		Pack (2d4) / Den (2d4)
Alignment: 		Chaotic	     	 		Chaotic
Movement:		120’				120’
Armor Class:		5				5
Hit Dice:		3*				7*	
Attacks:		1 (bite or breath)		1 (bite or breath)
Damage:			1d6 or see below		1d6 or see below
Save:			F3     	   			F7
Morale:			+1				+1
Treasure Type:		F				P
XP:	 		65				790
Hell hounds are cunning and intelligent creatures roughly the size of dire wolves, with red to red-brown fur. These demonic hounds favor hot environments and may be found around volcanic activity or with other creatures that prefer hot environments, though they also commonly take up residence in dungeons. They are immune to the effects of all non-magical fire. Hellhounds will bite 70% of the time for 1d6 hit points damage, and breathe fire the other 30% of the time. Their fiery breath affects one target and deals 1d6 points of damage per Hit Die the attacking hell hound possesses. A successful saving throw versus Breath reduces the damage by half. Hell hounds have an imperfect ability to detect invisibility to a range of 60’, with a 75% probability of detection.

Herd Animals
% In Lair:	None
Dungeon Enc:	None
Wilderness Enc:	Herd (3d10)
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	240’ (80’)
Armor Class:	2
Hit Dice:		1 to 4
Attacks:		None or 1 (butt)
Damage:	1d4, 1d6, or 1d8
Save:		F1 or F2
Morale:		-3
Treasure Type:	None
XP:		10/20/50/80
Herd animals include any of several kinds of grazing animals that live in herds. Region and climate will determine which specific kind of grazing herd animal is encountered. The following are some typical kinds and their relative toughness: antelope, deer, and goats (1 or 2 HD, 1d4 butt); caribou, cattle, and oxen (3 HD, 1d6 butt); buffalo, elk and moose (4 HD, 1d8 butt). In any large group of herd animals there are 4 females or young for every 1 male. Adult males have 1d4 additional hit points, and their horns or antlers enable them to attack by butting an opponent. Young have half the standard adult hit points. In most cases herd animals will flee from predators. Males of the larger species will occasionally fight to protect the females and young.

Hippogriff
% In Lair:	10%
Dungeon Enc:	None
Wilderness Enc:	Herd (2d8) / Aerie (2d8)
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	180’ (60’)
	Fly:	360’ (120’)
Armor Class:	4
Hit Dice:		3 + 1
Attacks:		3 (2 talons, bite)
Damage:	1d6/1d6/1d10
Save:		F2
Morale:		0
Treasure Type:	F
XP:		65
Hippogriffs are aggressive flying creatures that combine features of horses and giant eagles. They have the forebody and heads of giant eagles and the hindquarters of horses. A typical hippogriff is 9’ long, has a wingspan of 20’, and weighs 1,000lb. Voracious omnivores, hippogriffs will hunt humanoids as readily as any other meal. They have a particular taste for pegasi meat.
A flying hippogriff can make a dive attack with its talons, dealing double damage. If a hippogriff hits a creature smaller than itself with both its talons, the hippogriff grabs the creature struck unless it makes a saving throw versus Paralysis. Grabbed creatures of dwarf size or less may be carried off. 
Hippogriffs typically nest high in the mountains. When a hippogriff aerie is encountered, there is a 50% chance that 1d6 eggs or 1d4 young are present. Hippogriffs fight to the death to defend their young. If eggs or young are captured, they can be raised and trained as mounts. Hippogriffs can carry up to 45 stone (450lb) and move at full movement, or they can carry a maximum of 90 stone (900lb) at half movement.

Hobgoblin
% In Lair:	25%
Dungeon Enc:	Gang (1d6) / Lair (1 warband)
Wilderness Enc:	Warband (1d8 gangs) / Village (1d10 warbands)
Alignment:	Chaotic
Movement:	90’ (30’)
Armor Class:	3
Hit Dice:		1 + 1
Attacks:		1 (weapon)
Damage:	1d8 or weapon
Save:		F1
Morale:		0
Treasure Type:	E (per warband)
XP:		15
Hobgoblins were cross-bred from goblins and men by the ancient Zaharans as elite shock troops during the Empyrean War. They are larger, stronger, and smarter than their diminutive cousins.  Hobgoblins have dark orange or red-orange skin, with hair ranging from dark reddish-brown to dark gray. Hobgoblins’ eyes are yellowish or dark brown, while their teeth are yellow. Their garments tend to be brightly colored, often blood red with black-dyed leather. When armed for battle, hobgoblins generally wear scale armor and favor swords, spears, polearms, and composite bows, which they keep in good repair. Hobgoblins may reside below ground, but often live or venture to the surface, and suffer no penalties to daylight like their smaller cousins.
Each hobgoblin gang will be led by a champion with AC5, 2 Hit Dice, 9 hit points, and a +1 bonus to damage rolls from strength. Each hobgoblin warband will be led by a sub-chieftain with AC6, 3 Hit Dice, 13 hit points, and a +2 bonus to damage rolls. A hobgoblin lair or village will be led by a chieftain with AC7, 5 Hit Dice, 21 hit points, and a +3 bonus to damage rolls. As long as the chieftain is alive, the hobgoblins will gain a +1 to morale rolls. Hobgoblin lairs and villages will have females and young equal to 150% and 300% of the number of males, respectively. Female hobgoblins fight as goblins, but young never fight.
When hobgoblins are encountered in a village, certain additional creatures may be present. There is a 60% chance a hobgoblin village will be guarded by 2d6 trained albino apes. In addition, a hobgoblin village has a 90% chance to have a shaman present and a 75% chance of a witch doctor. A shaman is equivalent to a sub-chieftain statistically, but has Clerical abilities at level 1d8. A witch doctor is equivalent to a champion statistically, but has Mage abilities at level 1d6. 

Horse
			Light				Medium				Heavy
% In Lair:		None				None				None
Dungeon Enc:		None				None				None
Wilderness Enc:		Herd (1d10x10)			Herd (1d10x10)			Herd (1d10x10)
Alignment: 		Neutral				Neutral				Neutral
Movement:		240’ (80’)			180’ (60’)  			120’ (40’)
Armor Class:		2    				2    				2
Hit Dice:		2				3				3+3
Attacks:		1  or 2 hooves			1 or 2 hooves			1 or 2 hooves
Damage:			1d4/1d4				1d6/1d6				1d8/1d8
Save:			F1				F2				F2
Morale:			-2 or 0				-1 or +1			-2 or 0
Treasure Type:		None  				None  				None
XP:	 		20				50				65
Light Horse: Light horses are built for speed and long-distance travel. Light horses can carry up to 20 stone (200lb) and move at full movement, or they can carry a maximum of 40 stone (400lb) and have movement halved. Light horses can be trained for war, gaining +2 to morale and one extra hoof attack. The rider of a war horse may attack with a charge, dealing double damage with a lance. The war horse may attack with its hooves during the charge as well. Most wild horses are light horses.
Medium Horse: These horses have been bred to be fast, strong and sturdy, but are meant for shorter distance travel. Medium horses can carry up to 30 stone (300lb) and move at full movement, or they can carry a maximum of 60 stone (600lb) and have movement halved. Medium horses are neither the best riding nor draft horses, but are ideal for war, and may be trained as above.  
Heavy Horse: These horse breeds are the largest of all, bred to be big, strong laborers. Heavy horses can carry up to 40 stone (400lb) and move at full movement, or they can carry a maximum of 80 stone (800lb) and have movement halved. Most breeds of heavy horses are too placid to be trained for war, so heavy warhorses are very expensive. If trained for war, they function as noted above.

Hydra
% In Lair:	20%
Dungeon Enc:	Solitary (1) / Lair (1)
Wilderness Enc:	Solitary / Lair (1)
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	120’ (40’)
Armor Class:	4
Hit Dice:		5 to 12*
Attacks:		As head number
Damage:	1d10 per head
Save:		F5 to F12	
Morale:		+2
Treasure Type:	I (5-7 HD, K (8-9 HD) or M (10-12 HD) 
XP:		350-2,100
Hydras are reptile-like monsters with 5-12 (1d8+4) heads. The creatures have skin shaded gray-brown to dark brown, with a light yellow or tan underbelly, eyes of amber, and yellow-white teeth. An average hydra is 20’ long and weighs about 4,000lb. Hydras have a number of Hit Die equal to their number of heads, with maximum hit points on each Hit Die. Each head attempts to bite an opponent in a round, so the number of attacks a hydra has each round is equal to the number of heads it has. When a hydra has suffered 8 points of damage, 1 head becomes useless. For each additional 8 hp damage, another head becomes useless. When all heads have been destroyed, the hydra dies. A hydra saves as a Fighter equal in level to the hydra’s Hit Dice.
Regenerating Hydra: This terrifying hydra has regenerative powers similar to a troll’s. 1d4 rounds after the hydra loses a head, it will grow 2 new heads, subject to a maximum possible 12 heads. Heads can be prevented from regenerating only if they are cauterized with fire before they re-grow. 
Aquatic Hydra: The aquatic hydra is a variation of the standard hydra. It has all of the same characteristics and abilities, but has fins rather than legs and lives under water.
The Judge may create other variations of hydra. Some possibilities include hydra that can breathe fire for 8 points of damage per head, or bites that have poisonous venom.

Invisible Stalker
% In Lair:	None
Dungeon Enc:	Solitary (1)
Wilderness Enc:	Solitary (1)
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	120’ (40’)
Armor Class:	6
Hit Dice:		8*
Attacks:		1
Damage:	4d4
Save:		F8
Morale:		+4
Treasure Type:	None
XP:		1,100
Invisible stalkers are creatures of magic from another plane of existence. They sometimes serve mages, who summon them with the spell invisible stalker to perform specific tasks. A summoned invisible stalker undertakes whatever task the summoner commands, even if the task sends it hundreds or thousands of miles away. The creature follows a command until the task is completed and obeys only the summoner. However, it resents protracted missions or complex tasks and seeks to pervert its instructions accordingly. Invisible stalkers may be dispelled, and return to their home plane. Creatures that cannot detect invisible suffer a -3 penalty to avoid being surprised by invisible stalkers. 

Kobold
% In Lair:	40%
Dungeon Enc:	Gang (4d4) / Lair (1 warband) 
Wilderness Enc:	Warband (1d6 gangs) / Village (1d10 warbands)
Alignment:	Chaotic
Movement:	60’ (20’)
Armor Class:	2
Hit Dice:		1d4 hit points
Attacks:		1 (weapon)
Damage:	1d4 or weapon -1
Save:		0 level human
Morale:		-2
Treasure Type:	E (per warband)
XP:		5
Kobolds are short, cowardly, and sadistic beastmen bred from lizard men and dogs by the ancient Zaharans. Standing 2’ to 2 ½’ tall, kobold have scaly lizard-like skin ranging from dark rusty brown to a rusty black color, but an overall conformation that is vaguely dog-like. All have glowing red eyes with reptilian pupils. Kobolds wear ragged hides and scraps of leather armor, favoring red and orange colors. Their weapons are a mix of ill-kept javelins, short swords, spiked clubs, and hand axes. Kobolds live exclusively underground, and have an extended infravision to 90’. 
Each kobold gang will be led by one champion with AC3, 1-1 Hit Die, and 4 hit points, dealing 1d6 points of damage per attack. Each kobold warband will be led by a sub-chieftain with 1 Hit Die and 8 hit points, capable of dealing 1d6 points of damage per attack. A kobold lair or village will be led by a chieftain with AC5, 2 Hit Dice, and 12 hit points. The chieftain will deal 1d8 damage per attack or by weapon with a +1 bonus to damage rolls. As long as the chieftain is alive, the kobolds will gain a +2 to morale rolls. Kobold lairs and villages will have females and young equal to 50% and 150% of the number of males, respectively, neither of which fight.
When kobolds are encountered in a village, certain additional creatures will be present. The chieftain will be defended by 5d4 guards (equivalent to sub-chieftains statistically). A kobold village will also have kennel of trained beasts, either 1d4+1 boars (70%) or 1d4 giant weasels (30%). In addition, a kobold village has a 75% chance of a shaman being present, and a 50% chance of a witch doctor. A shaman is equivalent to a sub-chieftain statistically, but has Clerical abilities at level 1d6. A witch doctor is equivalent to a champion statistically, but has Mage abilities at level 1d4.  

Lamia
% In Lair:	40%
Dungeon Enc:	Solitary (1) / Lair (1)
Wilderness Enc:	Solitary (1) / Lair (1)
Alignment:	Chaotic
Movement:	240’ (80’)
Armor Class:	7
Hit Dice:		9***
Attacks:		1 (hoof or weapon)
Damage:	1d6 + WIS drain or by weapon
Save:		F9
Morale:		+1
Treasure Type:	N
XP:		2,500	
These highly dangerous creatures resemble women from the torso up, but have a centaur-like lower body that may resemble any beast, or even a combination of beasts. They are often found in ruins or labyrinths, waiting for unsuspecting adventurers. Though a lamia is powerful and dangerous in close combat, it has no stomach for a fair fight. Instead it uses its illusion ability (as the spell phantasmal force but affecting both sight and sound, with an effect that is permanent until touched or dispelled) to lure adventurers into perilous situations where it can destroy them. In addition, lamias have the following spell-like abilities: charm person (once per day), mirror image (once per day), and command word (at will). Finally, lamias can drain 1 point of WIS permanently merely by touching an opponent. When an opponent reaches WIS 3 he becomes completely obedient to the lamia. Lamias feast on the blood and flesh of humanoids. They speak the common tongue, and frequently speak ancient, evil languages such as Archaic.

Lammasu
% In Lair:	30%
Dungeon Enc:	Flight (2d4) / Lair (2d4)
Wilderness Enc:	Flight (2d4) / Lair (2d4)
Alignment:	Lawful
Movement:	120’ (40’)
	Fly:	240’ (80’)
Armor Class:	4
Hit Dice:		7+7***
Attacks:		2 (claws)
Damage:	1d6/1d6
Save:		F7
Morale:		+1
Treasure Type:	R
XP:		1,900	
Lammasu are benevolent creatures with the bodies of lions, the wings of eagles, and the faces of men. They are not by nature aggressive or violent, and may aid good beings in times of need. A lammasu almost always enters combat if it observes a good creature assailed by evil. When attacking, a lammasu may fight with its razor sharp claws or with spells. A lammasu casts divine spells as a 7th level Cleric. When casting any cure spell, a lammasu may heal twice the normal amount. All lammasu constantly radiate sustained protection from evil, with twice the effect of the normal spell. Finally, a lammasu can ignore any spell or spell-like effect with a Magic Resistance throw of 7+. 

Leech, Giant
% In Lair:	None
Dungeon Enc:	None
Wilderness Enc:	Brood (1d4)
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	120’ (40’)
Armor Class:	2
Hit Dice:		6*
Attacks:		1 (drain blood)
Damage:	1d6
Save:		F3
Morale:		+2
Treasure Type:	None
XP:		570	
Giant leeches are 4’ long, brown, and slimy. They live in marshy terrain and other bodies of stagnant water. When a giant leech hits in combat, it latches on to a victim with its round barbed mouth and drinks 1d6 hit points of blood from the victim each round. Once attached, a giant leech will only release a victim if the victim dies or the leech itself is killed.

Lizard, Giant
			Draco				Gecko
% In Lair:		25%				25%
Dungeon Enc:		Lounge (1d3) / Lair (1d6)	Lounge (1d6) / Lair (1d10)
Wilderness Enc:		Lounge (1d3) / Lair (1d6)	Lounge (1d6) / Lair (1d10)
Alignment: 		Neutral	       	    		Neutral
Movement:		120’ (40’)			120’ (40’)
              Fly:	210’ (70’)			-
Armor Class:  		4    				4
Hit Dice:		4 + 2				3 + 1
Attacks:		1 (bite)			1 (bite)
Damage:			1d10				1d8
Save:			F3				F2
Morale:			-1				-1
Treasure Type:		None				None
XP:	 		140				65

			Horned Chameleon		Tuatara
% In Lair:		25%    				25%
Dungeon Enc:		Lounge (1d3) / Lair (1d6)	Lounge (1d2) / Lair (1d4)
Wilderness Enc:		Lounge (1d3) / Lair (1d6)	Lounge (1d2) / Lair (1d4)
Alignment: 		Neutral	       	    		Neutral
Movement:		120’ (40’)			90’ (30’)
Armor Class:		7    				5
Hit Dice:		5*				6
Attacks:		2 (bite, horn)			3 (2 claws, bite)
Damage:			2d4/1d6	 			1d4/1d4/2d6
Save:			F3				F4
Morale:			-1				-2
Treasure Type:		None				None
XP:	 		350				320
Giant Draco Lizard: The giant draco has a length of 6’, and is capable of gliding in the air due to large skin flaps below its limbs. Although they live primarily above ground, they do occasionally venture underground to seek shelter or look for a meal.
Giant Gecko: The nocturnal giant gecko has a length of 5’. Giant geckos, like their smaller cousins, are adept at walking sheer cliffs, and even upside down. This ability allows them to spring upon unwary prey from above.
Giant Horned Chameleon: The immense 7’ giant horned chameleon can surprise its prey, despite its bulk, due to its uncanny ability to take on the color, appearance, and texture of its local surroundings. Characters encountering giant horned chameleons suffer a -3 penalty to surprise rolls. In addition to its bite and horn, the giant horned chameleon has two special attacks. The first is its sticky tongue, which can lash out to a distance of 5’. If this attack succeeds, the victim is immediately yanked back to the chameleon’s mouth and bitten without the need for another attack throw, for 2d4 points of damage. The second special attack is a tail lash. If this attack succeeds, the opponent is knocked down. An opponent may not attack the same round this occurs.
Giant Tuatara Lizard: This giant leathery skinned 8’ carnivorous lizard has formidable spikes that run the length of its dorsal side. The iguana-like giant tuatara has infravision to 90’ when it lowers a special membrane-like eyelid over each of its eyes.

Lizardman
% In Lair:	30%
Dungeon Enc:	Gang (2d4) / Lair (1 warband)
Wilderness Enc:	Warband (1d8 gangs) / Village (1d10 warbands)
Alignment:	Chaotic
Movement:	60’ (20’)
	Swim:	120’ (40’)
Armor Class:	4
Hit Dice:		2 + 1
Attacks:		3 or 1 (2 claws and 1 bite, or weapon)
Damage:	1d3/1d3/1d8 or by weapon + 1
Save:		F2
Morale:		+2
Treasure Type:	L (per warband)
XP:		35
These scaly beastmen were magically bred from a cross of men and giant lizards long ago. Lizardmen once ruled a powerful Kingdom, but over time they have degenerated to a state of primitive savagery. They stand 6’ to 7’ tall, with the heads and tails of lizards. Primitive and vicious, they delight in feasting upon the flesh of other humanoids. They often venture into dungeons, especially if there is an aquatic entrance. They otherwise dwell in marshes and along the banks of bodies of water. They have tough, scaly hides but often carry shields for additional protection. Lizardmen can attack with bites and claws, or may wield spiked clubs, javelins, and barbed darts (treat as daggers when thrown). Their immense strength grants them a +1 bonus to damage with weapons. 
Each lizardman gang will be led by a champion with AC 5, 3+1 Hit Dice, and 17 hit points. Due to its strength, the champion will deal +1 damage with its natural attacks, or +2 damage when using weapons. Each lizardman warband will be led by a sub-chieftain with AC6, 4+1 Hit Dice, and 21 hit points, dealing +2 damage with their natural attacks or +3 with weapons. A lizardman lair will be led by a chieftain with AC7, 6+2 Hit Dice, and 30 hit points, dealing +2 damage with natural attacks, or +3 damage with weapons. As long as the chieftain is alive, the lizardmen will gain a +1 to morale rolls. Lizardmen lairs will have 1d4x10 females and 1d4x20 eggs for every 20 lizardmen. Lizardmen females fight as gnolls, while eggs do not fight. 
When lizardmen are encountered in a village, certain additional creatures may be present. A lizardman village has a 75% chance of a shaman being present, and a 50% chance of a witch doctor. A shaman is equivalent to a sub-chieftain statistically, but has Clerical abilities at level 1d6. A witch doctor is equivalent to a champion statistically, but has Mage abilities of level 1d4. 

Locust, Cavern
% In Lair:	30%
Dungeon Enc:	Plague (1d10) / Nest (2d10) 
Wilderness Enc:	None
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	60’ (20’)
	Fly:	180’ (60’)
Armor Class:	5
Hit Dice:		2*
Attacks:		1 (bite, slam, spit)
Damage:	1d2/1d4/see below
Save:		F2
Morale:		-3
Treasure Type:	None
XP:		29
Cavern locusts resemble giant 2’ or 3’ long grasshoppers, and are the color of stone. They primarily eat plants and all kinds of fungus that grows underground. They are immune to the effects of yellow mold and other poisons. 
All cavern locusts in a group will shriek when disturbed, attracting wandering monsters. The Judge should roll an encounter throw each round that one or more cave locusts are attacking; if wandering monsters are indicated, they will arrive in 1d4 rounds. Cavern locusts are prone to panic, and will typically jump up to 60’ away if they sense a disturbance. This haphazard sudden flight, however, can be in any direction. They will accidentally flee in the direction of the group half the time, and on a successful attack throw inflict 1d4 points of damage by slamming into a creature. 
If forced into combat, the locusts may produce a brown, sticky spit that they propel to 10’ away. This attack throws is always against an AC of 0, because its effects take place even if the spittle does not bypass armor. If struck, the opponent must succeed in a saving throw versus Poison, or becomes incapacitated due to the horrible smell of the spittle. This lasts for 1 turn, before the opponent becomes immune to the odor. The spittle must be rinsed off or any creature that comes to within 5’ of a spit-soaked creature is subject to a saving throw versus Poison, and failure indicates the creature is wracked with vomiting.

Lycanthrope
			Werebear			Wereboar			Wererat
% In Lair:		10%				20%				30%
Dungeon Enc:		Sloth (1d4) / Lair (1d4)	Sounder (1d4) / Lair (2d4)	Pack (1d8) / Lair (2d6)
Wilderness Enc:		Sloth (1d4) / Lair (1d4)	Herd (2d4) / Lair (2d4)		Plague (2d6) / Lair (2d6)
Alignment: 		Neutral	      	   		Neutral	     	  		Chaotic
Movement:		120’ (40’)			150’ (50’)			120’ (40’)
Armor Class:		7 (1)				5 (0)				2 (0)
Hit Dice:		6*				4 + 1*				3*
Attacks:		3 (2 claws, bite)		1 (tusk bite)			1 (bite or weapon)
Damage:			2d4/2d4/ 2d8			2d6				1d4 or weapon
Save:			F6	 			F4				F3
Morale:			+2				+1				0
Treasure Type:		L				J				G
XP:	 		570				215				65

			Weretiger			Werewolf
% In Lair:		15%				25%
Dungeon Enc:		Troop (1d4) / Lair (1d4)	Pack (1d6) / Lair (2d6)
Wilderness Enc:		Troop (1d4) / Lair (1d4)	Route (2d6) / Lair (2d6)
Alignment: 		Neutral	      	   		Chaotic
Movement:		150’ (50’)			180’ (60’)
Armor Class:		6 (0)				4 (0)
Hit Dice:		5*				4*
Attacks:		3 (2 claws, bite)  		1 (bite)
Damage:			1d6/1d6/2d6 			2d4
Save:			F5				F4
Morale:			+1				0
Treasure Type:		J				J
XP:	 		350				135
All lycanthropes are humans cursed with the disease lycanthropy. They are able to take the form of one kind of animal, and are able to summon the aid of 1d2 of this same kind of animal, which will appear in 1d4 rounds. Lycanthropes never wear armor, since this would hinder the shape-changing process. Wolfsbane is an effective ward against all lycanthropes, and if one is touched with it (whether thrown at it or otherwise hit with it), the lycanthrope must succeed in a saving throw versus Poison or flee out of fear. When killed, a lycanthrope takes his human form. Horses and other domestic animals can sense lycanthropes when they are near, and will act restless or bolt.
Lycanthrope Forms: When a lycanthrope is in its human form, it may have subtle secondary characteristics in common with the animal type it is capable of transforming into. Examples could include extra body hair, striped “birth marks” on weretigers, or larger ears on a wererat. When a lycanthrope is in its animal form, it may only communicate with other animals of its type, but may not speak any humanoid language. In addition, when in the animal form, lycanthropes are immune to all attacks from normal weapons. They can be harmed by spells, silver, and enchanted weapons.
The Disease: The horrid disease of lycanthropy is transmitted when a creature suffers the loss of 50% or more of his total hit points to a lycanthrope’s claws and bite. The victim will become a lycanthrope of the type that wounded him in 2d6 days, but several days before the disease has fully taken hold the victim will show signs and begin to take on some of the secondary characteristics mentioned above. Only humans may become a lycanthrope. Demi-humans and other humanoids do contract the disease; they just die after 2d6 days rather than become a lycanthrope. Lycanthropy may also be inherited. If one parent is a lycanthrope, there is a 50% chance that the child will become a lycanthrope at puberty. If both parents are lycanthropes, the child has a 100% chance of becoming a lycanthrope. In the rare event that the parents are not the same kind of lycanthrope, the type is determined randomly between the parental types. Lycanthropy may be cured with the cleric spell cure disease if cast before the disease has taken full hold. Inherited lycanthropy can never be cured. See Transformations in Chapter 10 for additional information on handling lycanthropic characters.
Werebear: Highly intelligent and thoughtful lycanthropes, werebears are not inherently evil and may be friendly if approached carefully. They tend to be quite solitary, though they occasionally live with normal bears. As other bears, if a Werebear achieves a successful attack with both claws in the same round, it may grab its opponent in a crushing hug for 2d8 points of damage.
Wereboar: These aggressive, dim-witted, lycanthropes are easily enraged. If enraged, they will fight with a bonus of +2 to attack throws, and continue fighting until there are no more enemies or until they are killed.
Wererat: In addition to assuming the form of a giant rat, wererats can assume an intermediate “ratman” form. In ratman form, wererats are able to use weapons and humanoid speech, but retain their animal form’s immunity to natural weapons and ability to communicate with rats. Wererats are highly intelligent, sly, and very stealthy, so characters encountering them suffer a -2 penalty to surprise rolls. 
Weretiger: Weretigers have the natural cat-like grace of the animals they transform into. They have great curiosity and are not particularly malicious. Their stealth gives characters encountering them a -2 penalty to surprise rolls. 
Werewolf: Werewolves are not extremely intelligent in animal form, but they make up for this in cunning. They roam in packs, and a pack consisting of at least 5 individuals will have a pack leader that fights as a monster of 5 Hit Dice and has 30 hit points. This individual is of greater strength, and receives a damage roll bonus of +2.

Manticore
% In Lair:	20%
Dungeon Enc:	Flight (1d2) / Lair (1d4)
Wilderness Enc:	Wing (1d4) / Lair (1d4)
Alignment:	Chaotic
Movement:	120’ (40’)
	Fly:	180’ (60’)
Armor Class:	5
Hit Dice:		6 + 1*
Attacks:		3 (2 claws, bite) or 1 (spikes)
Damage:	1d4/1d4/2d4 or see below
Save:		F6
Morale:		+1
Treasure Type:	K
XP:		680
This foul monster delights in feasting on human flesh. It has the face of a human, but there the similarities end. The manticore has giant bat wings, a lion’s body, and a long reptilian tail that has 24 barbed spikes growing from its end. The manticore can throw 6 spikes per round, and can do so when airborne. Spikes can hit targets up to 180’ away and deal 1d6 points of damage each. The spikes grow back at a rate of 2 every day. Manticores usually live in the mountains, but have been known to venture into dungeons.

Mastodon
% In Lair:	None
Dungeon Enc:	None
Wilderness Enc:	Herd (2d8)
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	120’ (40’)
Armor Class:	6
Hit Dice:		15
Attacks:		2 (tusks) or 1 (trample)
Damage:	2d6/2d6 or 4d8
Save:		F8
Morale:		0
Treasure Type:	Special
XP:		1,800
Mastodons are prehistoric cousins to elephants, but are adapted to colder climates and have a thick coat of shaggy hair. When in close combat, they may attempt to attack with tusks or attempt to trample. Mastodons have a +4 to their attack throw when attempting to trample an opponent that is man-sized or smaller. When distance permits, mastodons may charge with their tusk attacks to deal double damage. Although mastodons do not keep treasure, the ivory from their tusks is valuable. Each tusk is worth 2d4x100gp.

Medusa
% In Lair:	50%
Dungeon Enc:	Coterie (1d3) / Lair (1d4)
Wilderness Enc:	Coven (1d4) / Lair (1d4)
Alignment:	Chaotic
Movement:	90’ (30’)
Armor Class:	1
Hit Dice:		4***
Attacks:		1 (snakebite or special)
Damage:	1d6, poison
Save:		F7
Morale:		0
Treasure Type:	H
XP:		245
Medusa are indistinguishable from human women, except that they have vicious snakes on their heads rather than hair. They may attempt to disguise themselves with a hooded robe, only to suddenly reveal their true nature. Any character that meets a medusa’s petrifying gaze is required to make a saving throw versus Petrification or he turns to stone. Due to their inherently magical nature, medusas save as 7 Hit Dice monsters despite only having 4 Hit Dice. Half of the treasure in a medusa’s lair is likely to be on petrified victims, and will only be accessible if the victims are restored to flesh. 

Men
		Berserker				Brigand					Pirate
% In Lair:	20%					20%					10%
Dungeon Enc:	Gang (1d6) / Lair (1 warband)   	Gang (2d4) / Outpost (1 band)		None
Wilderness Enc:	Warband (1d8 gangs) / Lair (1 warband)  Band (1d10 gangs)/ Camp (2d6 bands)	Fleet (by vessel type)/ Island (1 fleet)
Alignment: 	Neutral	     	      	      		Chaotic	   	   	     		Neutral or Chaotic
Movement:	120’ (40’)				120’ (40’)				120’ (40’)
Armor Class:	2    					Armor type				Armor type
Hit Dice:	1+1*					1     					1
Attacks:	1					1					1
Damage:		1d6 or weapon type			1d6 or weapon type			1d6 or weapon type
Save:		F1     	      				F1     	      				F1
Morale:		+4					0					-2
Treasure Type:	J (per warband)				H (per band)				Varies (per fleet)
XP:	 	21     					10     					10
		
		Merchant				Nomad
% In Lair:	None					10%
Dungeon Enc:	None					None  
Wilderness Enc:	Caravan (1d4x10 wagons)			Caravan (1d4x10)  / Camp (2d6 caravans)
Alignment: 	Neutral					Neutral        
Movement:	90’ (30’)				120’ (40’)   
Armor Class:	4   					Armor type  
Hit Dice:	1					1                
Attacks:	1					1
Damage:		1d6 or weapon type			1d6 or weapon type
Save:		F1     	      				F1     
Morale:		Varies					0
Treasure Type:	J (per 10 wagons) 			E (per caravan)
XP:	 	10     	  				10
The men here are all considered 1st level fighters. Individuals of greater level will typically lead them. The Treasure Types provided indicate treasure found in lairs, except for the case of merchants and pirates.  However, any leaders or other leveled characters present may possess magic items in addition to those indicated by the treasure type. For each category of item (potion, sword, etc.), there is a 5% chance per level of the leader that he possesses an item of that category. 
Berserker: These fighters are engulfed in a battle rage whenever they fight any humanoid. This determination gives them a +2 to their attack value, and enables them to battle fearlessly until killed (+4 morale). Berserkers are equipped with leather armor and use great axes, two-handed swords or pole arms. Each berserker warband will be led by a 4th level fighter with Berserkergang proficiency. 
Brigand: These men are outlaws and renegade mercenaries who have banded together under the shared interest of stealing and pillaging. 50% of brigand gangs encountered will be armed with a short sword and short bow, and wear leather armor and a shield. The other 50% will be better equipped, with long swords, chainmail, shields, and light warhorses. 
Each band of brigands will be led by one 4th level fighter and two 2nd level fighters. These leaders will be equipped with long swords, lances, and plate armor, and mounted on medium warhorses with chain barding.
Brigand camps (wilderness lairs) will be led by a brigand captain (a 9th level fighter). The brigand captain will have one lieutenant for every 2 bands in the camp. Each lieutenant will be a fighter of 5th level. Additionally, there is a 30% chance an 8th level cleric will be present in the camp, and a 50% chance a mage of level 8+1d2 will be present.  
Pirate: Pirates raid ships and coastal towns and can be found wherever merchant ships ply the sea lanes. Pirates commonly dock in lawless cities willing to trade with few questions. 70% of pirates encountered are chaotic-aligned buccaneers who will prey on any and every ship they encounter. The remaining 30% are neutral-aligned privateers, who will only attack ships sailing under the flags of their nation’s enemies.
A pirate fleet may be found on any body of water, whether lake, sea, or river. The size of the fleet will depend on the type of ships the pirates are manning. Riverboat fleets will number 2d4 ships; fleets of small galleys or small troop transports will number 1d6; fleets of longships or large troop transports will number 1d4; fleets of large galleys or war galleys will number 1d3. The number of pirates encountered is determined by the crew requirements for their ships, and will include a full complement of marines, rowers, and sailors. 
The marines and sailors will always be pirates, as will be any rowers on riverboats and longships, but the rowers on galleys will be captive slaves. All pirates are armed with swords and leather armor. 40% are also armed with crossbows or short bows. Slaves are never armed and will not fight.  
For every 30 pirates, there will be one 4th level fighter present. For every 50 pirates, there will be one 5th level fighter present. There will also be 1d4 hostages for every 50 pirates.  
Pirate fleets of less than 200 will be led by a pirate captain of 8th level; fleets of 200 or greater will be led by a pirate king of 11th level. A pirate king will always have a first mate of 8th level and will have a 75% chance of employing a mage of level 8+1d2. 
Pirate lairs are remote islands where they bury their ill-gotten plunder. When pirates are encountered away from their lair, the pirate captain or king will have a treasure map to the lair’s location. The number of ships, number of pirates, and treasure of each type of pirate fleet is summarized on the Pirate Fleet table.
Merchant: Merchants trade goods over great distances. For protection in their long overland journeys, merchants organize into large caravans consisting of 10-40 large wagons. Each wagon will be drawn by four heavy draft horses. For every 10 wagons, there will be 5 merchants on medium riding horses. Merchants will wear chainmail armor and carry crossbows and daggers. Every 10 wagons will be defended by 20 1st level fighters led by 2 3rd level fighters on medium riding horses. Guards will wear chainmail armor and carry swords, crossbows, and daggers.  Every merchant caravan will have guard captain, a 5th level fighter mounted on a medium warhorse. The captain will wear plate armor and carry sword, crossbow, and dagger. Riding and draft animal types may vary based on the terrain.
Nomad: Nomads are tribal people that live off the land and by animal husbandry. They follow game and seasonal foods by living in temporary camps of tents or simple structures. Nomads often trade with humans and demi-humans they encounter, but will almost always clash with beastmen. Every nomad caravan will be led by one 4th level fighter accompanied by two 2nd level fighters.  Nomads will wear leather (50%), chain (30%), or lamellar armor (20%), and carry short swords and daggers. 50% of nomads encountered will carry composite bows and be mounted on light riding horses. The remaining 50% will carry lances and be mounted on light warhorses. Nomad leaders will carry both lance and bow, wear lamellar armor, and ride light warhorses.
Nomad camps (wilderness lairs) will be ruled by a chieftain (fighter of 8th level). The chieftain will be accompanied by an elite guard consisting of one 5th level fighter for every four caravans. There is a 50% chance that a 9th level cleric will be present in a camp and a 25% chance that an 8th level mage will be present. There is a 70% chance the camp will be protected by 4d6 trained hunting dogs. Nomad camps will have adult noncombatants and young equal to 100% and 200% of the number of able-bodied adults respectively.

Mermen
% In Lair:	25%
Dungeon Enc:	None
Wilderness Enc:	Band (1d20) / Village (2d20 bands)
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	-
	Swim:	120’ (40’)
Armor Class:	3
Hit Dice:		1
Attacks:		1
Damage:	1d6 or weapon type
Save:		F1
Morale:		0
Treasure Type:	B (per band)
XP:		10
These legendary beings have human-like bodies from the waist up and fish tails from the waist down. They use weapons that are convenient in water, including daggers, spears, and tridents. These creatures live exclusively in large bodies of water. They may occasionally trade fish and other sea bounty to human villages, but generally they keep to themselves. 
Each band of mermen will be led by a leader with 2 Hit Dice. Mermen villages (undersea lairs) will be under the command of an exceptional leader with 4 Hit Dice. There is a 70% chance the village will be protected by 3d6 giant fish. Mermen villages will have mermaids and young equal to 100% of the number of mermen each. The villages will usually be guarded by 3d6 giant rockfish. 

Minotaur
% In Lair:	20%
Dungeon Enc:	Gang (1d6) / Lair (1d8)
Wilderness Enc:	Warband (1d8) / Lair (1d8)
Alignment:	Chaotic
Movement:	120’ (40’)
Armor Class:	3
Hit Dice:		6
Attacks:		2 or 1 (gore, 1 bite or weapon)
Damage:	1d6/1d6 or by weapon +2
Save:		F6
Morale:		+4
Treasure Type:	L, G
XP:		320
These monstrous humanoids have the bodies of huge, muscled male humans but the heads of a horned bull. They usually live in dungeons, where they prey upon anyone who ventures. Minotaurs are relentless, and will attempt to chase fleeing prey, tracking enemies that they lose sight of with a proficiency throw of 18+. They delight in the taste of human flesh and will feast on any slain characters. In combat, minotaurs will either attack with a weapon or bite and gore with their horns.  Due to their great strength they receive a +2 bonus to damage rolls when using weapons.

Morlock
% In Lair:	35%
Dungeon Enc:	Gang (1d12) / Lair (1 warband)
Wilderness Enc:	Warband (1d8 gangs) / Lair (1 warband)
Alignment:	Chaotic
Movement:	120’ (40’)
Armor Class:	1
Hit Dice:		1
Attacks:		1 (weapon)
Damage:	As weapon
Save:		F1
Morale:		+1
Treasure Type:	E (per warband)
XP:		10
Morlocks are a degenerate race of subterranean humans that lair deep within caverns or dungeons. They are all albinos, and have developed a carnivorous diet that favors the meat of other humanoids. They only venture to the surface at night, and if caught in the daylight they suffer an attack penalty of -2. Their subterranean existence has given them 90’ infravision. These foul degenerate people wield any sort of weapon, but favor spears and swords. Morlocks are enemies of neanderthals, dwarves, and gnomes, but they sometimes join groups of orcs and goblins.
Each morlock gang will be led by a champion with AC2, 1+1 Hit Die, and 8 hit points. Each morlock warband will be led by a sub-chieftain with AC3, 2 Hit Dice, 12 hit points, and a +1 bonus to damage rolls. A morlock lair will be led by a chieftain with AC4, 3 Hit Dice, 15 hit points, and a +2 bonus to damage rolls. There is a 75% chance the lair will be protected by 3d6 trained white apes. Morlock lairs will have females and young equal to 100% and 200% of the number of males, respectively.

Mule
% In Lair:	None
Dungeon Enc:	Rake (1d8)
Wilderness Enc:	Herd (2d6)
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	120’ (40’)
Armor Class:	2
Hit Dice:		2
Attacks:		1 (kick or bite)
Damage:	1d4 or 1d3
Save:		0 level human
Morale:		0
Treasure Type:	None
XP:		20
Mules are a hybrid of a donkey and a horse. Mules are notoriously ornery, and may attack if particularly provoked. They can carry 20 stone (200lb) comfortably, and may carry a maximum of 40 stone (400lb). In the latter case, movement rate is reduced to 60’ per turn. At the Judge’s discretion, a mule may be taken into the depths of a dungeon to aid in transporting equipment or treasure, so long as conditions allow.

Mummy
% In Lair:	20%
Dungeon Enc:	Throng (1d4) / Tomb (1d12)
Wilderness Enc:	Horde (1d12) / Tomb (1d12)
Alignment:	Chaotic
Movement:	60’ (20’)
Armor Class:	6
Hit Dice:		5 + 1*
Attacks:		1
Damage:	1d12, mummy rot
Save:		F5
Morale:		+4
Treasure Type:	N x2
XP:		460
Mummies are preserved undead corpses animated by the dark arts, and commonly guard the old tombs and lost ruins of that fell kingdom. These undead are so fearsome that any being seeing one must succeed in a saving throw versus Paralysis or become paralyzed with dread. This affect passes if the mummy leaves the victims range of vision, or if the mummy engages in combat. When a mummy successfully strikes a victim, the victim suffers 1d12 points of damage and contracts mummy rot. 
Mummy rot is a powerful curse, not a natural disease. When under the effects of the curse, characters are unable to receive benefits from any form of magical healing, and heal naturally at only 1/10th the normal rate. Mummy rot may be removed with the spell remove curse. Like other undead, mummies are unaffected by poison and charm, sleep, or hold spells. Further, mummies may only be harmed by magical weapons, spells, and fire-based attacks, all of which do only half damage.

Neanderthal
% In Lair:	40%
Dungeon Enc:	Band (1d10) / Lair (1d6 bands)
Wilderness Enc:	Band (1d10) / Lair (1d6 bands)
Alignment:	Lawful
Movement:	120’ (40’)
Armor Class:	1
Hit Dice:		2
Attacks:		1 (weapon)
Damage:	2d4 or weapon
Save:		F2
Morale:		-1
Treasure Type:	E
XP:		20
These humanoids are cousins to humans. They often are assumed to be brutish, due to their large brow ridges, receding chins, and slightly shorter, denser bodies. However, though they live a primitive lifestyle, they are as intelligent as humans. Neanderthals typically attack with spears and weapons with stone blades. Neanderthals revere cave bears, and will hunt them for rites of passage and religious purposes. They despise kobolds, goblins, and morlocks, but enjoy the company of gnomes and dwarves.
Each neanderthal band will be led by a champion with AC2, 3 Hit Dice, and 15 hit points. A neanderthal lair will be ruled by a strong, cunning chieftain with 6 Hit Dice and a +2 bonus to damage rolls. There is a 75% chance the lair will be protected by 3d6 trained white apes. Neanderthal lairs will have women and children equal to 100% and 200% of the number of males, respectively. 

Nymph
			Dryad				Naiad		
% In Lair:		10%				95%
Dungeon Enc:		None				None
Wilderness Enc:		Solitary (1) / Grove (1d6)	Solitary (1) / Watery lair (2d20)
Alignment: 		Neutral	       	     		Neutral        
Movement:		120’ (40’)			-
Swim:			-    				120’ (40’)   
Armor Class:		4				2 
Hit Dice:		2*				1*
Attacks:		Charm				1
Damage:			-				1d4 
Save:			E4				E1
Morale:			-2				-2
Treasure Type:		D				D
XP:	 		29				13
Dryad: Shy, intelligent, and resolute, dryads are as elusive as they are alluring. A dryad’s delicate features are much like a female elf’s, though her flesh is the color of bark, and her hair is the color of a canopy of leaves that changes color with the seasons. Although they are generally solitary, up to six dryads may be encountered in one place on rare occasions. A dryad is united by spirit to a particular tree, and if this tree is ever killed, the dryad will be killed as well. Dryads may physically join with their trees, effectively disappearing. A dryad may not venture more than 240’ from her tree, or she will die after 1 turn. 
Dryads have the innate ability to charm other creatures. They will sometimes use this ability if threatened or if they take a particular liking to an individual. A victim of the charm must succeed in a saving throw versus Spells, or he goes to the dryad’s tree and disappears within it. Any individual who does this is lost forever. Groves of dryads often accumulate treasure from past victims or infatuations, and store it at the base of their trees, underground below the roots. 
Naiad: Naiads are related to dryads, but are water beings that are 5’ tall and appear as beautiful elf-like women with greenish, bluish, or green-gray skin color. They typically live in any permanent body of water, such as a lake, large pond, or river. Like dryads, naiads have the inability to charm other creatures. The victim is allowed a saving throw versus Spells, and if this is failed the character is taken into the watery domain of the naiad where he will serve her for 12 months. Naiads are able to cast water breathing on a character at will. The effects last for 24 hours per casting. If their charm fails, naiads will fight with very small weapons, or summon a giant fish (bass) for protection. The giant bass has the following characteristics: AL N, MV 120’ (40’), AC 2, HD 2, #AT 1, Dmg 1d6, Save F1, ML 0.

Ochre Jelly
% In Lair:	None
Dungeon Enc:	Solitary (1)
Wilderness Enc:	None
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	30’ (10’)
Armor Class:	1
Hit Dice:		5*
Attacks:		1
Damage:	2d6
Save:		F3
Morale:		N/A
Treasure Type:	None
XP:		350
The ochre jelly is a slimy, giant amoeba with a distinct golden yellow hue. An ochre jelly constantly oozes an acidic slime that can eat through cloth, wood, and leather after 1 round, but cannot affect stone or metal. The acid inflicts 2d6 points of damage to bare flesh. An ochre jelly has no fixed form, and is able to squeeze under doors and into other small spaces with ease. When attacked with lightning or weapons, an ochre jelly will divide into 1d3+2 littler amoebas with 2 Hit Dice each. These smaller jellies deal 1d6 points of damage to flesh, and suffer no further effects from lightning or weapons. Fire and cold will damage an ochre jelly normally.

Octopus, Giant
% In Lair:	None
Dungeon Enc:	None
Wilderness Enc:	Pod (1d2)
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	-
	Swim:	90’ (30’)
Armor Class:	2
Hit Dice:		8**
Attacks:		8 (tentacles) or 1 (bite)
Damage:	1d3 (per tentacle)/1d6
Save:		F4
Morale:		-1
Treasure Type:	None
XP:		1,600
These creatures are aggressive and territorial hunters that live in temperate or tropical ocean waters. The tentacles of the giant octopus reach 10’ or more in length, and are studded with barbs and sharp-edged suckers. The tentacles constrict victims when they successfully attack, dealing 1d3 points of damage each on every successive round. For each tentacle that is constricting a victim, the victim suffers a cumulative attack penalty of -1. For instance, if four tentacles are constricting a character, he takes 4d3 points of damage per round and suffers -4 to attack throws. A tentacle can be cut off if a total of 6 or more points of damage is dealt with one blow. A giant octopus that is losing an encounter will seek to escape by spraying a 40’ radius cloud of black ink to obscure its retreat. A giant octopus is able to move at triple speed (270’ per round) when fleeing.

Ogre
% In Lair:	20%
Dungeon Enc:	Gang (1d6) / Lair (1 warband) 
Wilderness Enc:	Warband (1d3 gangs) / Village (1d10 warbands)
Alignment:	Chaotic
Movement:	90’ (30’)
Armor Class:	4
Hit Dice:		4 + 1
Attacks:		1 (large club or weapon)
Damage:	1d10 or weapon +3
Save:		F4
Morale:		+2
Treasure Type:	L (per warband) and special
XP:		140
Ogres are 9’ to 10’ tall beastmen that resemble big brutish humans. They are thought to have been bred from men and carnivorous apes for use as heavy infantry during the Empyrean War that toppled the Archaic Kingdom. Their skin ranges from dull yellow to dull brown and is very hairy. Their clothing consists of poorly cured furs and hides, which add to their naturally repellent odor. Ogres despise Neanderthals and will attempt to destroy them when encountered. Ogres normally fight with large clubs or axes and enjoy a +3 bonus to damage rolls due to their great strength. Ogres usually live under rock shelters, or in caves, but often will venture into dungeons. When ogres are found away from their lair they will carry sacks containing 1d6x100gp each.
Each ogre gang will be led by a champion with AC5, 5+1 Hit Dice, and 33 hit points. Due to its great strength, it will deal 2d6 points of damage with its great club or gain a +3 bonus to damage rolls with man-sized weapons. Each ogre warband will be led by a sub-chieftain with AC6, 6+1 Hit Dice, and 37 hit points, dealing 2d6+1 damage with large weapons or gaining a +3 bonus to damage rolls with man-sized weapons. An ogre lair or village will be led a chieftain with AC7, 8+2 Hit Dice, and 45 hit points. The chieftain will deal 2d6+1 damage with his great club or axe, or gain a +4 to damage rolls with man-sized weapons. As long as the chieftain is alive, the ogres will gain a +1 to morale rolls. Ogre lairs and villages will have 2d6 female and 2d4 young ogres for every 10 ogres. Female ogres fight as bugbears, while young ogres fight as goblins. 
When ogres are encountered in a village, certain additional creatures may be present. Ogres often rely on slaves for food and work, so there is a 30% chance that 2d8 prisoners will be kept in the village. In addition, an ogre village has a 50% chance of a shaman being present, and a 25% chance of a witch doctor.  A shaman is equivalent to a sub-chieftain statistically, but has Clerical abilities at level 1d4.  A witch doctor is equivalent to a champion, but with Mage abilities of level 1d2. 

Orc
% In Lair:	35%
Dungeon Enc:	Gang (2d4) / Lair (1 warband) 
Wilderness Enc:	Warband (2d6 gangs) / Village (1d10 warbands)
Alignment:	Chaotic
Movement:	120’ (40’)
Armor Class:	3
Hit Dice:		1
Attacks:		1 (weapon)
Damage:	1d6 or weapon
Save:		F1
Morale:		0
Treasure Type:	G (per warband)
XP:		10
Orcs are grotesque beastmen bred as warriors from men and wild boars by the ancient Zaharans. They stand just over 6’ tall, with pig-like faces, reddish eyes, and black hair. Orcs prefer wearing vivid colors that many humans would consider unpleasant, such as blood red, mustard yellow, yellow-green, and deep purple. Their equipment is dirty and unkempt, though serviceable. Orcs are primarily subterranean, but they are also nocturnal and may be found on the surface at night. They suffer a penalty of -1 to attack throws when in sunlight. 
Orcs are exceedingly cruel and delight in the torment and murder of others. They are also exceptionally greedy, which makes them particularly attractive to the chaotic rulers who hire orcs as mercenary soldiers. Orcs prefer to fight with scimitars, spears, flails, axes, spears, polearms, short bows, and crossbows.
Each orc gang will be led by a champion with AC4, 1+1 Hit Die, 8 hit points, and a +1 bonus to damage rolls from strength. Each orc warband will be led by a sub-chieftain with AC5, 2 Hit Dice monster, 12 hit points, and a +1 bonus to damage rolls. An orc lair or village will be led by a chieftain with AC6, 4 Hit Dice, 20 hit points, and a +2 bonus to damage rolls. As long as the chieftain is alive, the orcs will gain a +2 to morale rolls. Orc lairs and villages will have females and young equal to 100% and 200% of the number of males, respectively. Female orcs fight as goblins, while young orcs do not fight
When orcs are encountered in a village, certain additional creatures will be present. Orcs keep slaves of various human, demi-human, and humanoid races, so there will be 1d20 prisoners per 100 orcs in the village. There is a 50% chance an orc village will be guarded by 1d4+1 ogres and a 25% chance for 1d4 trolls. In addition, an orc village has a 75% chance of a shaman being present, and a 50% chance of a witch doctor. A shaman is equivalent to a sub-chieftain statistically, but has Clerical abilities at level 1d6. A witch doctor is equivalent to a champion statistically, but has Mage abilities at level 1d4.

Owl Bear
% In Lair:	30%
Dungeon Enc:	Sloth (1d4) / Den (1d4)
Wilderness Enc:	Sloth (1d4) / Den (1d4)
Alignment:	Chaotic
Movement:	120’ (40’)
Armor Class:	4
Hit Dice:		5
Attacks:		3 (2claws, bite)
Damage:	1d8/1d8/1d8
Save:		F3
Morale:		+1
Treasure Type:	I
XP:		200
Having the head of a giant owl and the body of a bear, owl bears are rumored to be a magical hybrid created for an unfathomably chaotic purpose. Their coats range in color from brown-black to yellowish brown; their beaks are a dull ivory color. A full-grown male can stand as tall as 8’ and weigh up to 1,500lb. Adventurers who have survived encounters with the creature often speak of the bestial madness they glimpsed in its red-rimmed eyes. They are mean spirited carnivores. Just like bears, an owl bear may hug an opponent for 2d8 points of damage if it successfully hits with both paws in the same round. Owl bears are known to live in wooded areas, and are equally likely to take residence in caves or dungeons.

Pegasus
% In Lair:	15%
Dungeon Enc:	None
Wilderness Enc:	Flock (1d12) / Nest (1d12)
Alignment:	Lawful
Movement:	240’ (80’)
	Fly:	480’ (160’)
Armor Class:	3
Hit Dice:		2 + 2
Attacks:		2 (hooves)
Damage:	1d6/1d6
Save:		F2
Morale:		0
Treasure Type:	None
XP:		35
Pegasi are magnificent winged horses that sometimes serve the cause of good. Though highly prized as aerial steeds, pegasi are wild and shy creatures not easily tamed. When a pegasi aerie is encountered, there is a 50% chance that 1d6 eggs or 1d4 young are present. Pegasi eggs and young can be raised and trained as mounts by lawful characters. Pegasi avoid hippogriffs, which are their natural predators. Pegasi can carry up to 30 stone (300lb) and move at full movement, and they can carry a maximum of 60 stone (600lb) and have movement halved.

Phase Tiger
% In Lair:	25%
Dungeon Enc:	Clowder(1d4) / Den (1d4)
Wilderness Enc:	Clowder (1d4) / Den (1d4)
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	150’ (50’)
Armor Class:	5
Hit Dice:		6
Attacks:		2 (tentacles)
Damage:	2d4/2d4
Save:		F6
Morale:		0
Treasure Type:	K
XP:		320
The phase tiger is an intelligent monster that resembles a six-legged tiger with a long, scaly reptilian spiked whip on each shoulder. The whips have sharp barbs, which inflict 2d4 points of damage each. Phase tigers are named for their ability to project an illusion of themselves 3’ from where they actually stand. Because of this magical ability, all opponents of a phase tiger receive a penalty of -2 to attack throws, and phase tigers have a bonus of +2 on saving throws. Blink dogs are the hated enemies of phase tigers, and phase tigers will seek to kill any blink dogs encountered.

Pterodactyl
		Pterodactyl	Pteranodon
% In Lair:	None		None
Dungeon Enc:	None		None
Wilderness Enc:	Flight (2d4)	Flight (1d4)
Alignment:	Neutral		Neutral
Movement:	
	Fly:	180’ (60’)	240’ (120’)
Armor Class:	2		3
Hit Dice:	1		5
Attacks:	1 (bite)	1 (bite)
Damage:		1d3		1d12
Save:		F1		F3
Morale:		-1		0
Treasure Type:	None		None
XP:		10		200
These prehistoric winged reptiles are usually found in warm or tropical environments.
Pterodactyl: These large winged reptiles have wings that span 7’ to 10’. They glide through the air, watching for prey on the ground. They typically attack small animals, or beings up to the size of a halfling. They have been known to attack larger beings if they are particularly famished.
Pteranodon: This winged reptile, a giant version of the pterodactyl, has wings that span 25’ or more. They attack larger animals, including human-sized individuals.

Purple Worm
% In Lair:	None
Dungeon Enc:	Clew (1d2)
Wilderness Enc:	Herd (1d4)
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	60’ (20’)
Armor Class:	3
Hit Dice:		15**
Attacks:		2 (bite, sting)
Damage:	2d8/1d8, poison
Save:		F8
Morale:		+2
Treasure Type:	P x2
XP:		4,200
These dreaded purple monstrosities grow to lengths of 100’ or more. They burrow deep underground, only surfacing to consume unsuspecting prey. They attack by stinging with their poison tail, or biting with their gaping maw. When a purple worm is found below the earth, it is usually from inside one of its tunnels. In this case, the tunnel may only be as wide as the worm, preventing it from attacking with both attacks in the same round.
If a purple worm’s sting attack hits, the victim must succeed in a saving throw versus Poison or die. Purple worms are able to swallow whole creatures of up to horse size on an attack throw at least 4 higher than the target value, and on any unmodified attack throw of 20. A swallowed creature takes 3d6 points of damage per round inside the purple worm’s belly. The damage stops when either the creature dies or the worm is killed. If a creature that has been swallowed has a sharp weapon, it may attack the purple worm from inside its belly with an attack penalty of -4. Should the swallowed creature die and remain in the worm’s belly for 6 turns, it is irrecoverably digested.  Because of their propensity to swallow creatures whole, an encounter with purple worms may yield treasure even though the creature has no lair.  The treasure (if any) is always found inside the creature’s belly.

Remorhaz
% In Lair:	25%
Dungeon Enc:	Solitary (1) / Nest (1d6)
Wilderness Enc:	Herd (1d6) / Colony (3d6)
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	90’ (30’)
      Burrow:	60’ (20’)
Armor Class:	10
Hit Dice:		10 – 15**
Attacks:		1 
Damage:	2d8
Save:		F16
Morale:		+4
Treasure Type:	P (10-12 HD); K, P (13 HD); M, P (14-15 HD) (per remorhaz)
XP:		2,250- 4,200
A remorhaz is a horrific myriapod, 20 to 40’ long or more, with multi-faceted eyes, vestigial wings and twelve pairs of segmented legs ending in tarsal claws. The creature’s hide is a whitish-blue chitin, but when it attacks, it pulses with a reddish glow from the incinerating heat its body produces. Remorhaz hide under snow and ice until they hear movement above them, then attack from below and surprise prey.
An attacking remorhaz generates heat so intense that anything touching its body, or attacking it with natural weapons, takes 10d10 points of fire damage. Creatures striking with melee weapons do not take damage from the creature’s heat, but the heat is likely to melt or char their weapons. Any non-magical weapon is automatically destroyed, while magical weapons are allowed a save versus Blast to avoid destruction, adding any magic bonus to the roll.
Remorhaz are able to swallow whole creatures of up to man size on an unmodified attack throw of 20. Any creature swallowed whole takes 10d10 points of damage per round from the intense heat of the remorhaz’s gizzard. This continues until either the remorhaz is killed or until the swallowed creature dies. The cramped quarters inside the belly of the worm prevent attack from the inside by any weapon except a dagger. Attacking a remorhaz from inside its belly is difficult, so the swallowed creature suffers a -4 penalty to its attack throw. Should a swallowed creature die and remain in the remorhaz’s belly for 6 turns, it is irrecoverably digested. Because of their propensity to swallow creatures whole, any encounter with remorhaz may yield treasure, whether wandering or in lair. The treasure (if any) is always found inside the creature’s belly.

Rhagodessa, Giant
% In Lair:	35%
Dungeon Enc:	Clutter (1d4) / Den (1d6)
Wilderness Enc:	Cluster (1d6) / Den (1d6)
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	150’ (50’)
Armor Class:	4
Hit Dice:		4 + 2*
Attacks:		1 (leg or bite)
Damage:	0 or 2d8
Save:		F2
Morale:		+1
Treasure Type:	I
XP:		215
The giant rhagodessa is a nocturnal carnivorous arachnid that closely resembles a spider, but has immense crushing mandibles. They have a chestnut colored thorax and are tan or mustard colored on their remaining bodies. These 6’ long monsters have shorter legs than spiders, but are able to climb walls. The rhagodessa’s front legs have suction pits that do not deal damage, but on a successful hit they can pull an opponent to the mandibles that deal 2d8 points of damage on the second round, with no extra attack throw needed.

Rhinoceros
			Ordinary			Woolly
% In Lair:		None				None
Dungeon Enc:		None				None
Wilderness Enc:		Herd (1d12)			Herd (1d8)
Alignment: 		Neutral				Neutral
Movement:		120’ (40’)			120’ (40’)
Armor Class:		4    				5
Hit Dice:		6				8
Attacks:		1 (gore or  trample)		1 (gore or  trample)
Damage:			2d4 or 2d8  			2d6 or 2d12
Save:			F3     				F4
Morale:			-2				-2
Treasure Type:		None				None
XP:	 		320				600
The rhinoceros is infamous for its bad temper and willingness to charge intruders. When in close combat, they may attack with their gore or trample. A rhinoceros has a +4 to its attack throw when attempting to trample an opponent that is man-sized or smaller. When distance permits, rhinos may charge with their gore attack to deal double damage. A herd of these beasts will stampede if threatened, in any direction to be determined randomly.
Woolly Rhinoceros: The woolly rhino is a prehistoric rhino that is larger and covered in a dense, coarse hair. 

Roc
			Small				Large				Giant
% In Lair:		10%				10%			 	10%
Dungeon Enc:		None				None			 	None
Wilderness Enc:		Flight (1d12) / Aerie (1d12)	Flight (1d8) / Aerie (1d8)	Solitary (1) / Aerie (1d2)
Alignment: 		Lawful 	      	      		Lawful 	       	     		Lawful
Movement:		60’ (20’)			60’ (20’)			60’ (20’)
              Fly:	480’ (160’)			480’ (160’)			480’ (160’)
Armor Class:  		5    				7    				9
Hit Dice:		6*				12*				36*
Attacks:		3 (2 talons, bite)		3 (2 talons, bite)		3 (2 talons, bite)
Damage:			1d4+1/1d4+1/2d6			1d8/1d8/2d10 			3d6/3d6/8d6
Save:			F3				F6				F9
Morale:			0				+1				+2
Treasure Type:		I, M				K, P				M, P
XP:	 		570				2,100				12,500
Rocs are powerful creatures living in high elevations and warm environments. They look somewhat like huge eagles. Immense appetites accompany their great size, as rocs will frequently consume large mammals including horses and cattle. 
When flying, rocs can swoop into a dive attack with their immense claws, dealing double damage. If a roc hits a creature smaller than itself with both its talons, the roc automatically grabs the creature struck (no saving throw). If the creature is light enough for the roc to carry, the grabbed creature may be carried off. To escape the roc’s talons, the creature must make a successful saving throw versus Paralysis at -4.
When a roc aerie is encountered, there is a 50% probability that 1d6 eggs or 1d4 young are present. Rocs fight to the death to defend their young. If eggs or young are captured, they can be trained as mounts by lawful characters. If a chaotic being encounters a roc, the roc will have a penalty of -2 to reaction rolls, while a neutral being suffers a -1 penalty. This is due to the lawful nature of rocs, and their preference for dealing with other lawful creatures. 
Normal rocs can carry up to 15 stone (150lb) and move at full movement, or can carry a maximum of 30 stone (300lb) at half movement. Obviously only the smallest characters can easily ride a normal roc. Large rocs can carry up to 60 stone (600lb) and move at full movement, or can carry a maximum of 120 stone (1,200lb) at half movement. Giants rocs can easily carry up to 300 stone (3,000lb) and can carry a maximum of 600 stone (6,000lb) at half movement.

Rot Grub
% In Lair:	None
Dungeon Enc:	Brood (5d4)
Wilderness Enc:	Brood (5d4)
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	10’ (2’)
Armor Class:	0
Hit Dice:		1 hit point
Attacks:		See below
Damage:	See below
Save:		0 level human
Morale:		N/A
Treasure Type:	None
XP:		5
Although rot grubs can be found in animal waste and other foul refuse, they prefer to consume tissue that is still alive. Upon contact with a living being, rot grubs will begin to vigorously burrow deep into the body. Fire must be applied to the site of contact at once in order to prevent the rot grubs from burrowing further. Burning a grub inflicts 1d6 points of damage to the character. If not stopped immediately, within 1d3 turns the rot grubs will find the heart and kill their victim. The spell cure disease will destroy the rot grubs in a victim’s body.

Rust Monster
% In Lair:	10%
Dungeon Enc:	Pack (1d4) / Den (1d4)
Wilderness Enc: 	Pack (1d4) / Den (1d4)
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	120’ (40’)
Armor Class:	7
Hit Dice:		5
Attacks:		1
Damage:	See below
Save:		F3
Morale:		-1
Treasure Type:	None
XP:		200
The body of this monster resembles a giant armadillo with a long scaly tail. The hide of these creatures varies in color from a yellowish tan underside to a rust-red upper back. A rust monster’s prehensile antennae can rust metals on contact, as can their hide when struck with metal weapons.  All ordinary metal armor and weapons either struck by antennae or contacting a rust monster’s hide (when it is attacked with a sword, for instance) instantly becomes utterly and permanently useless from severe rusting. Due to this effect, ordinary metal weapons do not harm rust monsters. Magic items will first lose their magical bonuses, 1 at a time, until they are ordinary items of their type. Any subsequent contact will then rust the item. Each “plus” grants the item a 10% probability of surviving contact unscathed. For instance, if a character strikes a rust monster with a dagger +2, it has an 80% chance of becoming a dagger +1. If it does, any subsequent hit has a 90% chance of making the dagger an ordinary dagger. If it becomes an ordinary dagger, a hit after that renders the dagger useless. A rust monster feeds upon the rust it creates in this manner.

Salamander
			Flame				Frost
% In Lair:		25%				25%
Dungeon Enc:		Band (1d4+1) / Nest (2d4)	Band (1d3) / Nest (1d3)
Wilderness Enc:		Swarm (2d4) / Nest (2d4)	Band (1d3) / Nest (1d3)
Alignment: 		Neutral	      	   		Chaotic
Movement:		120’ (40’)			120’ (40’)
Armor Class:		7    				6
Hit Dice:		8*				12*
Attacks:		3 (2 claws, bite)		5 (4 claws, bite)
Damage:			1d4/1d4/1d8 			1d6 (each claw)/2d6
Save:			F8				F12
Morale:			0				0
Treasure Type:		Q				Q
XP:	 		1,100				2,100
Flame Salamander: The flame salamander is a kind of intelligent fire elemental. It has a lizard-like appearance, with red scales and four limbs. It reaches a length of 12’ to 16’. Scorching heat emanates from the flame salamander, and all creatures within 20’ who are susceptible to fire damage receive 1d8 points of damage per round. Flame salamanders are unharmed by all fire-based damage and non-magical weapons. They are unaffected by sleep or charm spells. These creatures often live in the molten lava of volcanoes, or otherwise in very hot and arid regions.
Frost Salamander: The frost salamander resembles a flame salamander, except that it has six limbs and is white or bluish white. It attacks with its front four claws and a bite. Bone-chilling cold emanates from the frost salamander, and all creatures within 20’ that are susceptible to cold damage receive 1d8 points of damage per round. Frost salamanders are unharmed by all cold-based damage and non-magical weapons. They are unaffected by sleep or charm spells. These creatures prefer to live in icy and cold regions.
These two forms of salamander are natural enemies. They despise one another and will always fight if in the same vicinity.

Scorpion, Giant
% In Lair:	50%
Dungeon Enc:	Scourge (1d6) / Nest (1d6)
Wilderness Enc:	Scourge (1d6) / Nest (1d6)
Alignment:	Chaotic
Movement:	150’ (50’)
Armor Class:	7
Hit Dice:		4*
Attacks:		3 (2 claws, sting)
Damage:	1d10/1d10/1d4, poison
Save:		F2
Morale:		+3
Treasure Type:	None
XP:		135
These aggressive giant cousins to scorpions are about 6’ long. Any time that a claw successfully strikes, the sting attack receives a bonus of +2 to attack. If stung, a victim needs to succeed at a saving throw versus Poison or die. Giant scorpions can be found in dungeons, rock shelters, ruins, and hot environments.

Sea Serpent
% In Lair:	None
Dungeon Enc:	None
Wilderness Enc:	Swarm (2d6)
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	
	Swim:	150’ (50’)
Armor Class:	4
Hit Dice:		6
Attacks:		1 (bite or constrict)
Damage:	2d6 or see below
Save:		F3
Morale:		0
Treasure Type:	M, I
XP:		320
Much dreaded by sailors, sea serpents are immense, 30’ long snake-like beasts that will attack ships as large as themselves. A serpent can wrap its serpentine body around ships to constrict for 1d10 structural points of damage each round. When attacking creatures or characters, it attacks with a bite that deals 2d6 points of damage. Although sea serpents have no lairs, their propensity for eating the cargo of sunken ships means they may have treasure inside their bellies. 

Shadow
% In Lair:	40%
Dungeon Enc:	Throng (1d8) / Haunt (1d12)
Wilderness Enc:	Horde (1d12) / Haunt (1d12)
Alignment:	Chaotic
Movement:	90’ (30’)
Armor Class:	2
Hit Dice:		2 + 2**
Attacks:		1
Damage:	1d4, special
Save:		F2
Morale:		+4
Treasure Type:	B
XP:		59
Although shadows seem to resemble ghosts, since they have no corporeal body and resemble shadows, they are not truly undead creatures. As a consequence, shadows are not susceptible to the cleric ability to turn undead. However, like undead, shadows are immune to poison and unaffected by charm, hold, or sleep spells. Shadows may only be struck with magical weapons. Shadows are very silent and difficult to observe, so characters encountering shadows suffer a -3 penalty to surprise rolls. When a shadow successfully attacks an opponent, the victim suffers 1d4 points of damage, and 1 point of STR is drained for 8 turns. Should a being be drained to STR 2, it collapses and becomes unable to move. At 0, it permanently transforms into a shadow.

Shark
			Bull				 Mako				Great White
% In Lair:		None				 None				None
Dungeon Enc:		None				 None				None
Wilderness Enc:		Shiver (3d6)			 Shiver (2d6)			Shiver (1d4)
Alignment: 		Neutral 			 Neutral			Neutral
Movement:						 				
          Swim:		180’ (60’)			 180’ (60’)			180’ (60’)
Armor Class:		5    				 5    				5
Hit Dice:		2*				 4*				8*
Attacks:		1 (bite)  			 1 (bite)			1 (bite)
Damage:			2d4				 2d6				2d10
Save:			F1				 F2				F4
Morale:			-1				 -1				-1
Treasure Type:		None				 None				None
XP:	 		29				 135				1,100
Sharks are some of the most efficient hunters of the sea. Although they are not very intelligent, they are cunning. As soon as sharks sense blood in the water (to a range of 300’) they become furious feeders and will fight to the death with no check for morale.
Bull Shark: Bull sharks are brown and reach a length of 8’. 
Mako Shark: These giant 15’ sharks will attack large prey. They are tan or gray.
Great White Shark: This immense shark can reach lengths exceeding 30’. They are silvery-gray with white bellies. These sharks are vicious, and may attack boats that are half their length.

Shrieker
% In Lair:	None
Dungeon Enc:	Troop (1d8)
Wilderness Enc:	None
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	9’ (3’)
Armor Class:	2
Hit Dice:		3
Attacks:		See below
Damage:	See below
Save:		F1
Morale:		N/A
Treasure Type:	None
XP:		50
A shrieker is a stationary fungus resembling a large, purple mushroom that grows in dark, subterranean places. Shriekers are named for their notorious propensity for making a loud noise when disturbed. A shrieker will emit its scream whenever it senses movement within 30’, or whenever light comes within 60’. The scream persists for 1d3 rounds. For every round a shrieker is screaming, there is a 50% probability that it catches the attention of a nearby wandering monster. Wandering monsters attracted by a shrieker will arrive on the scene within 2d6 rounds. 

Skeleton
% In Lair:	35%
Dungeon Enc:	Throng (3d4) / Boneyard (3d10)
Wilderness Enc:	Horde (3d10) / Boneyard (3d10)
Alignment:	Chaotic
Movement:	120’ (40’)
Armor Class:	2
Hit Dice:		1*
Attacks:		1
Damage:	1d6 or weapon
Save:		F1
Morale:		N/A
Treasure Type:	None
XP:		13
Skeletons are the animated bones of the dead. A skeleton is seldom garbed in anything more than the rotting remnants of any clothing or armor it was wearing when slain. Mindless automatons, they obey the orders of their evil masters. A skeleton does only what it is ordered to do. It can draw no conclusions of its own and takes no initiative. Because of this limitation, its instructions must always be simple. A skeleton attacks until destroyed. Skeletons are undead, and a cleric may turn them. Like other undead, skeletons are unaffected by charm or sleep spells. 

Skittering Maw
% In Lair:	10%
Dungeon Enc:	Solitary (1) / Den (1d4)
Wilderness Enc:	Shiver (1d4) / Den (1d4)
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	60’ (20’)
	Swim:	180’ (60’)
Armor Class:	5
Hit Dice:		8**
Attacks:		1 (bite)
Damage:	2d10, poison
Save:		F4
Morale:		+4
Treasure Type:	M
XP:		1,600
A hideous creation of the malignant mage Vermeren, the skittering maw has the body of a giant centipede and the head of a great white shark. Reaching lengths of over 30’, the skittering maw prefers dark, wet locations and stagnant waters. Due to their great size, skittering maws are even more poisonous than their centipede progenitors. Anyone bitten by a skittering maw must make a saving throw versus Poison or die in 1 turn. Skittering maws always fight to the death.

Snake
			Spitting Cobra				Pit Viper				Sea Snake
% In Lair:		None	 				None					None
Dungeon Enc:		Quiver (1d6)				Nest (1d8)				Den (1d8)
Wilderness Enc:		Quiver (1d6)				Nest (1d6)				Den (1d8)
Alignment: 		Neutral					Neutral					Neutral
Movement:		90’ (30’)      				90’ (30’)          			90’ (30’)          
Armor Class:		2   					3   					3
Hit Dice:		1*					2**					3*
Attacks:		1 (bite or spit)			1 (bite)				1 (bite)
Damage:			1d3, poison				1d4, poison				1, poison
Save:			F1   					F1   					F2
Morale:			-1					-1					-1
Treasure Type:		None					None					None
XP:	 		13					38					65

			Giant Python				Giant Rattler
% In Lair:		None  					None
Dungeon Enc:		Den (1d3)				Den (1d4)
Wilderness Enc:		Den (1d3)				Den (1d4)
Alignment:		Neutral					Neutral
Movement:		90’ (30’)				120’ (40’)
Armor Class:		3					4
Hit Dice:		5*					4*
Attacks:		2 (bite, constrict)			2 (bite)
Damage:			1d4/2d8					1d4, poison
Save:			F3					F2
Morale:			-1					-1
Treasure Type:		None					None
XP:			350					135
Snakes are legless reptiles, and often have venomous bites. Snakes usually are not aggressive and flee when confronted. They live in many different climates, but especially avoid severely cold environments.
Spitting Cobra: Like most snakes, the 3’ long spitting cobra avoids conflict. However, if it is threatened it will rear up and emit poisonous spittle. A victim is entitled to a saving throw versus Poison, and failure indicates the opponent is blinded permanently. The spell cure blindness will reverse the effects. The bite of the cobra deals 1d3 points of damage, and is venomous. A victim bitten must succeed in a saving throw versus Poison or be killed immediately.
Pit Viper: This gray-green snake is 5’ long, and the pits on its head are able to sense heat to a distance of 60’. Pit vipers are extremely fast, and will automatically have initiative every round. They have a venomous bite that requires a successful saving throw versus Poison, or the victim dies after 1d4+2 turns.
Sea Snake: These 6’ long aquatic snakes are extremely poisonous and aggressive. Their bites do very little damage, but like other venomous snakes, a victim must succeed in a saving throw versus Poison or die after 1d4+2 turns. 
Giant Python: The giant python is 20’ long. It attacks first with a bite, and on a successful hit it is also able to constrict a victim for an additional 2d8 points of damage. The constriction continues on subsequent rounds. The hold may be broken with a successful saving throw versus Paralyzation; breaking the hold takes a full round. 
Giant Rattlesnake: These snakes are extremely quick, and bite twice per round. One bite occurs at the beginning of the round, and another at the end of the round. The bite is venomous, and a victim must succeed in a saving throw versus Poison or die 1d4+2 turns later. The giant rattlesnake is 10’ long, carnivorous, and will hunt large mammals.

Spectre
% In Lair:	20%
Dungeon Enc:	Throng (1d4), Haunt (1d8)
Wilderness Enc:	Horde (1d8) / Haunt (1d8)
Alignment:	Chaotic
Movement:	150’ (50’)
	Fly:	300’ (100’)
Armor Class:	7
Hit Dice:		6**
Attacks:		1 (touch)
Damage:	1d8, drain level
Save:		F6
Morale:		+3
Treasure Type:	N
XP:		820
A spectre is an incorporeal undead creature of great power. Roughly human sized, and weightless, a spectre looks much as it did in life and can be easily recognized by those who knew the individual or have seen the individual’s face in a painting or a drawing. In many cases, the evidence of a violent death is visible on its body. These powerful undead are unharmed by ordinary weapons, including weapons made of silver. Like all undead, they are immune to poison and charm, hold, and sleep spells. What makes the spectre so dreadful is its enervative touch. Whenever a spectre strikes a victim, it deals 1d8 points of damage and energy drains two levels of experience. Should a character be slain by a spectre, he will become a spectre 24 hours after his death. The new spectre will be under the command of the spectre that killed him.

Spider, Giant
			Black Widow				Crab Spider				Tarantula
% In Lair:		90%   					70%  					50%
Dungeon Enc:		Clutter (1d3) / Den (1d3)    		Clutter (1d4) / Den (1d4)		Clutter (1d3) / Den (1d3)
Wilderness Enc:		Clutter (1d3) / Den (1d3)    		Clutter (1d4) / Den (1d4)		Clutter (1d3) / Den (1d3)
Alignment: 		Neutral       	    			Neutral	      	    			Neutral
Movement:		60’ (20’) 				120’ (40’)				120’ (40’)
Web:			120’ (40’) 				None 					None
Armor Class:		3      					2					4
Hit Dice:		3**					2**					4**
Attacks:		1 (bite)				1 (bite)				1 (bite or barbs)
Damage:			2d6, poison				1d8, poison				1d8, poison or see below
Save:			F2   					F1   					F2
Morale:			0					-1					0
Treasure Type:		C					C					F
XP:	 		80					38					190
Giant Black Widow: The giant black widow is 6’ long, of a shiny black color, with a red design resembling an hourglass on its ventral abdomen.  Giant black widows are very aggressive, and prefer to trap prey in their sticky web. The web has the same properties as that of the web produced by the spell of the same name. Any opponent bitten by the giant black widow must make a saving throw versus Poison; failure indicates death after 1 turn.
Giant Crab Spider: These 5’ long carnivorous spiders do not weave webs, but crawl upon vertical surfaces and ceilings to pounce upon prey. Characters encountering giant crab spiders suffer a -2 penalty to surprise rolls due to the spiders’ ability to change colors to match their environment. The bite of the giant crab spider is venomous, and a victim will die in 1d4 turns unless a saving throw versus Poison is made. The saving throw receives a bonus of +2, due to the less potent nature of the crab spider’s venom.
Giant Tarantula: The giant tarantula is 8’ long, with oily barbed hair all over its carapace. Tarantulas live in trees or in silk-lined tunnels, and excel at ambush. Characters encountering giant tarantulas suffer a -2 penalty to surprise rolls. When encountering prey at a distance, the giant tarantula will kick the barbed hairs of their abdomen. They can hit a target up to 30’ away and deal 1d4 points of damage. In addition, the secretions on the spider’s hairs itch and burn the skin, causing opponents struck to suffer a -2 penalty on attack throws for 1 day or until the spell cure light wounds is used. The bite of the giant tarantula is highly toxic, and a victim will die in 1 turn unless a saving throw versus Poison is made. 

Squid, Giant
% In Lair:	None
Dungeon Enc:	None
Wilderness Enc:	Pod (1d4)
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	
	Swim:	120’ (40’)
Armor Class:	2
Hit Dice:		6*
Attacks:		9 (8 tentacles, bite)
Damage:	1d4 (all tentacles)/1d10
Save:		F3
Morale:		-1 
Treasure Type:	None
XP:		570
These voracious free-swimming mollusks are fairly aggressive creatures, and attack almost anything they meet. Giant squids have bodies more than 20’ long, with two large tentacles and eight small tentacles. The large tentacles are used to wrap around entire ships, dealing 1d10 structural hit points of constriction damage. When constricting a ship, the squid will also attack with its great beak for an extra 2 points of structural hit point damage for each round. 
The squid’s smaller tentacles are used to grab smaller creatures on ships or near water. These tentacles constrict victims when they successfully attack, and deal 1d4 points of damage each per successive rounds. The squid may also attack with its beak for 1d10 points of damage. A smaller tentacle can be cut off if a total of 6 hit points or more of damage is dealt with one blow, while a larger one requires a minimum of 10 hp damage. A giant squid will swim away if it is losing an encounter, spraying a 30’ radius cloud of black ink to obscure its escape. 

Statue, Animated
			Crystal				Stone				 Iron
% In Lair:		None				None				 None
Dungeon Enc:		Parade (1d6)			Parade (1d3)			 Parade (1d4)
Wilderness Enc:		Parade (1d6)			Parade (1d3)			 Parade (1d4)
Alignment: 		Lawful 				Chaotic				 Neutral
Movement:		90’ (30’)			60’ (20’)			 30’ (10’)
Armor Class:		5   				5         			 5
Hit Dice:		3*				5*				 4**
Attacks:		2 (fists)			2 (fists)			 2 (fists)
Damage:			1d6/1d6				2d6/2d6         		 1d8/1d8
Save:			F3				F5				 F4
Morale:			N/A				N/A				 N/A
Treasure Type:		None				None				 None
XP:	 		65				350				 190
Animated statues are statues of ordinarily inorganic, inanimate material given life by powerful mages to guard their sanctums or perform other duties. Animated statues may be created in any form and size, but are most commonly humanoid.  Unless they engage in some form of movement, animated statues will appear to be normal statues even upon close inspection. The Judge may create animate statues composed of additional materials, using the above three examples as guidelines. Animated statues of any material are immune to the effects of poison, charm, sleep, and hold spells.
Crystal: These animate statues are composed of crystals, often quartz.
Stone: These statues appear to be made simply of some kind of stone, but inside the statue there is a large pocket of molten lava. This statue does not usually attack with fists, but projects lava through the tips of its fingers to inflict 2d6 hit points of burning damage.
Iron: When ordinary, metal, non-magical weapons strike an animate iron statue the attacker must succeed in a saving throw versus Spells. Otherwise, the weapon becomes lodged in the statue, and can only be retrieved by killing the statue.

Stegosaurus
% In Lair:	None
Dungeon Enc:	None
Wilderness Enc:	Herd (1d4)
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	60’ (20’)
Armor Class:	6
Hit Dice:		11
Attacks:		1 (tail or trample)
Damage:	2d8 or 2d6
Save:		F6
Morale:		-1
Treasure Type:	None
XP:		1,000
These prehistoric herbivore reptiles are 30’ long and 14’ high at the shoulder, with a strip of hard plates that runs along their spine. Their club-like tails have four large spikes on their ends, making them powerful weapons. This creature will most often be encountered in warm, tropical, or sub-tropical environments. While not carnivorous, they are easily provoked. When in close combat, they may attack with their tail or attempt to trample. Stegosauruses have a +4 to their attack throw when attempting to trample an opponent that is man-sized or smaller.

Stirge
% In Lair:	40%
Dungeon Enc:	Flock (1d10) / Nest (3d12)
Wilderness Enc:	Storm (3d12) / Nest (3d12) 
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	30’ (10’)
	Fly:	180’ (60’)
Armor Class:	2
Hit Dice:		1*
Attacks:		1 (proboscis) 
Damage:	1d3
Save:		F2
Morale:		+1
Treasure Type:	F
XP:		13
The stirge most closely resembles an anteater with feathers. A stirge’s body is about 1 foot long, with a wingspan of about 2’, and a weight of 1 pound. Its coloration ranges from rust-red to reddish-brown, with a dirty yellow underside. Its long proboscis is pink at the tip, fading to gray at its base. A stirge uses this long proboscis to penetrate a victim, latch on, and drain its blood. When a stirge attacks an opponent for the first time, its quick speed grants it a bonus of +2 to attack throws. A successful attack means the stirge has latched onto its opponent. It deals 1d3 points of damage from blood sucking immediately, and sucks 1d3 points of damage worth of blood every subsequent round. A stirge will remain attached to a victim until the victim dies, or until the stirge is killed.

Swarm
			Bat				Insect				Rat
% In Lair:		50%				25%				10%
Dungeon Enc:		Swarm (1) / Roost  (1d3) 	Swarm (1) / Nest (1d3)		Swarm (1d4) / Den (2d4)
Wilderness Enc:		Cloud (1d3) / Roost (1d3)	Plague (1d3) / Nest (1d3)	Horde (2d4) / Den (2d4)
Alignment: 		Neutral	      	    		Neutral	       	    		Neutral
Movement:		9’ (3’)				30’ (10’)  			60’ (20’)
          Fly:		120’ (40’)			60’ (20’)			-
          Swim:		-    				-   				30’ (10’)
Armor Class:		2				2				0
Hit Dice:		2 to 4*				2 to 4*				2 to 4*
Attacks:		1    				1    				1
Damage:			Confusion			2 points			1d6, disease
Save:			0 level human			0 level human			0 level human
Morale:			-2 or 0				+3				-3
Treasure Type:		None  				None				None
XP:	 		29/65/135			29/65/135			29/65/135
Swarms are a special type of monster that represents a mass of tiny creatures acting as one. A swarm may be roused if its nest is invaded, or if it is presented with strange smells or bright lights. A swarm normally occupies a 10’ x 30’ area, but may be expand or shrink as conditions merit. 
Swarms do not need to roll to attack. Instead, any character within the swarm is automatically hit by the creatures, suffering damage or other effects depending on the type of swarm. Character can reduce the effects by warding off the swarm with a torch, weapon or similar object, or by fleeing the swarm. Warding off a swarm with a torch or weapon will inflict 1d4 points of damage to the swarm. Fire-based and cold-based attacks will also damage a swarm, and a sleep spell will cause the entire swarm to go dormant. 
If a character flees from a swarm, it will take 3 rounds for him to swat off any remaining creatures, during which time he may continue to suffer from its effects. If a character flees into a body of water, he will be free of creatures in 1 round. However, any swarm that has suffered damage will chase a fleeing character. If a character flees from a swarm and is able to leave its line of sight, the swarm will not be able to pursue. 
Bat Swarm: A bat swarm is a large mass of flying, flapping, biting bats. Bat swarms do not cause damage, but all characters within the swarm must make a saving throw versus Spells each round or suffer from confusion (as the spell). A character who is warding off or fleeing from the bat swarm gains a +4 bonus to his saving throw. Bat swarms are not particularly predisposed to fight, and as such they are susceptible to a morale roll once each round. The morale roll does not apply to bats that are under another’s control.
Insect Swarm: An insect swarm is a large mass of small insects, such as bees, ants, wasps, spiders, and other small biting and stinging bugs that crawl or fly. An insect swarm inflicts 2 points of damage to any character engulfed. Double damage is dealt to characters wearing no armor (or monsters with an AC of 3 or worse). If a character wards the insects off (as above) or runs out of the swarm, the damage is halved. Unlike swarms of large creatures, insect swarms take no damage from weapons. 
Rat Swarm: A rat swarm consists of hundreds of ordinary rats. Any character within the rat swarm must make a saving throw versus Paralysis or fall to the ground under the writhing rodent horde, taking 1d6 points of damage. He may stand up the following round, but makes a new saving throw if still under the rat swarm. The character can make no attacks until he gets back on his feet. A character warding off or fleeing from the rat swarm gains a +4 bonus to his saving throw. Characters damaged by a rat swarm have a 5% chance of being infected by a disease, as per giant rats. 

Throghrin
% In Lair:	35%
Dungeon Enc:	Gang (1d6) / Lair (1d10)
Wilderness Enc:	Pack (1d10) / Lair (1d10)
Alignment:	Chaotic
Movement:	120’ (40’)
Armor Class:	3
Hit Dice:		3**
Attacks:		2 or 1 (2 claws or weapon)
Damage:	1d3/1d3 or weapon
Save:		F3
Morale:		+2
Treasure Type:	G
XP:		80
A throghrin may appear to be a hobgoblin at first glance, but these monsters are a actually a wicked, unholy magical hybrid of troll, hobgoblin, and ghoul. They have an affinity for the company of hobgoblins, and are occasionally employed as bodyguards to a hobgoblin king. Throghrin have the same paralyzing touch as a ghoul, and can regenerate as a troll for 1 hp per round. Hit points are gained at the start of each combat round. Despite their ghoulish bloodline, throghrin are not undead.

Titanothere
% In Lair:	None
Dungeon Enc:	None
Wilderness Enc:	Herd (1d6)
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	120’ (40’)
Armor Class:	4
Hit Dice:		12
Attacks:		1 (gore or trample)
Damage:	2d6 or 2d8
Save:		F6
Morale:		-1
Treasure Type:	None
XP:		1,200
These creatures are prehistoric relatives of the rhinoceros. They have large, blunt-tipped horns rather than the sharp horns of rhinos, and can reach a height of 10’ to 12’. Few creatures threaten these large beasts, and they are relatively peaceful herbivores. When in close combat, they may attack with their gore or trample. A titanothere has a +4 to its attack throw when attempting to trample an opponent that is man-sized or smaller. When distance permits, a titanothere may charge with its gore attack to deal double damage.

Toad, Giant
% In Lair:	None
Dungeon Enc:	Knot (1d4)
Wilderness Enc:	Knot (1d4)
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	90’ (30’)
Armor Class:	2
Hit Dice:		2 + 2*
Attacks:		1 (bite)
Damage:	1d4 + 1
Save:		F1
Morale:		-2
Treasure Type:	C
XP:		47
These immense toads can grow to be as large as a wolf and weigh up to 250lb. They have the ability to alter the color of their warty hides to match that of the dim dungeon corridors or dark forests they frequent, so characters encountering giant toads suffer a -1 penalty to surprise rolls. Giant toads have 15’ long tongues, and on a successful hit they are able to yank any creature dwarf sized or smaller toward their mouths for a bite attack. Giant toads are able to swallow whole creatures of up to dwarf size on an unmodified attack throw of 20. A creature that is swallowed will suffer 1d6 points of damage per round until they die or until the toad is killed. If the swallowed creature has a sharp weapon, it may attack the toad from inside its belly with an attack penalty of -4. Should the swallowed creature die and remain in the toad’s belly for 6 turns, it is irrecoverably digested. Because of their propensity to swallow creatures whole, any encounter with giant toads may yield treasure, whether wandering or in lair. The treasure (if any) is always found inside the creature’s belly.

Treant
% In Lair:	10%
Dungeon Enc:	None
Wilderness Enc:	Shepherds (1d4) / Grove (1d8)
Alignment:	Lawful
Movement:	60’ (20’)
Armor Class:	7
Hit Dice:		8*
Attacks:		2
Damage:	2d6/2d6
Save:		F8
Morale:		-2
Treasure Type:	P
XP:		1,100
A treant is a mobile, intelligent tree-like creature. A treant is about 18’ tall. Its leaves are deep green in the spring and summer. In the fall and winter the leaves change to yellow, orange, or red, but they rarely fall out. A treant’s legs fit together when closed to look like the trunk of a tree. A motionless treant cannot be distinguished from a normal tree at any distance of 30 yards or more. Because of treants’ inconspicuous nature, characters encountering treants suffer a -1 penalty to surprise rolls. Treants are very long lived, and as such they take few actions with any haste. Even speaking with treants can take a long, long time. They fear fire, and will be cautious if it is nearby. Treants have the ability to control 2 normal trees with a range of 60’. These animated trees will engage in combat with the same characteristics of a treant, and have movement of 30’ (10’). Treants may stop or start animating new trees on any given round.

Triceratops
% In Lair:	None
Dungeon Enc:	None
Wilderness Enc:	Herd (1d4)
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	90’ (30’)
Armor Class:	7
Hit Dice:		11
Attacks:		1 (gore or trample)
Damage:	3d6
Save:		F6
Morale:		0
Treasure Type:	None
XP:		1,200
These large, 12’ high and 40’ long prehistoric dinosaurs live in grassy environments in sub-tropical and temperate regions. Though they are herbivores, they are very aggressive with those who come near. Triceratops have three very large horns and a big bony plate on their skulls. If a triceratops has enough distance between it and its foe, it will commit to a charge to score double damage with its gore attack. When in close combat, it may attempt to gore its opponent or attempt to trample.  A triceratops gains a +4 to its attack throw when attempting to trample an opponent that is smaller or approximately equal in the size of a human. When distance permits, a triceratops may charge with its gore attack to deal double damage.

Troglodyte
% In Lair:	15%
Dungeon Enc:	Gang (1d8) / Lair (1 warband)
Wilderness Enc:	Warband (1d10 gangs) / Warren (1d10 warbands)
Alignment:	Chaotic
Movement:	120’ (40’)
Armor Class:	4
Hit Dice:		2
Attacks:		3 or 1 (2 claws, bite or weapon)
Damage:	1d4/1d4/1d4 or by weapon
Save:		F2
Morale:		+1
Treasure Type:	J (per warband)
XP:		20
These humanoid reptiles are green, scaly, and have a bony spine along the center of the top of their heads, backs, and backs of their arms. They may be a magical hybrid of lizardmen and chameleons. Whatever the case, troglodytes are malicious and warlike, and will attempt to slay any creatures that cross their paths. They have the ability to blend into their environment like a chameleon, so characters encountering troglodytes have a -2 penalty to surprise rolls. Their bodies are covered in small glands that produce a stinky, slimy coating on their scaly hide. All demi-humans and humans that come near a troglodyte are required to make a saving throw versus Poison, or suffer -2 to attack throws due to the disgusting, horrid stench. When using weapons, troglodytes favor stone axes or clubs, and great barbed darts (treat as javelins with +3 to attack throws). 
Each troglodyte gang will be led by a champion with AC5, 3 Hit Dice, 16 hit points, and a +2 bonus to damage rolls from strength. Each troglodyte warband will be led by a sub-chieftain with AC6, 4 Hit Dice, 20 hit points, and a +2 bonus to damage rolls. A troglodyte lair or warren will be led by a chieftain with AC7, 6 Hit Dice, 28 hit points, and a +3 bonus to damage rolls. As long as the chieftain is alive, the troglodytes will gain a +1 to morale rolls.  Troglodyte lairs and warrens will have females and eggs equal to 100% the number of males in the lair each. Female troglodytes fight as hobgoblins, but only to defend the eggs.
When troglodytes are encountered in their warren, certain additional creatures will be present. The chieftain will be accompanied by one additional sub-chieftain for every warband, and 2d4 additional champions. In addition, a warren has a 33% chance of a shaman being present, and a 25% chance of a witch doctor. A shaman is equivalent to a sub-chieftain statistically, but has Clerical abilities at level 1d4. A witch doctor is equivalent to a champion statistically, but has Mage abilities at level 1d2.

Troll
% In Lair:	40%
Dungeon Enc:	Gang (1d8) / Lair (1 gang) 
Wilderness Enc:	Gang (1d8) / Village (1d10 gangs)
Alignment:	Chaotic
Movement:	120’ (40’)
Armor Class:	5
Hit Dice:		6 + 3*
Attacks:		3 (2 claws, bite)
Damage:	1d6/1d6/1d10
Save:		F6
Morale:		+2 (0)
Treasure Type:	O (per gang)
XP:		680
A troll’s rubbery hide is moss green, mottled green and gray, or putrid gray, with hair of greenish black or iron gray hue. A typical adult troll stands 8’ tall. These monsters enjoy eating other intelligent humanoids. Trolls tend to lurk in dungeons, caverns, ruins, and swamps. They are very wiry and lanky, but excessively strong and have menacing, dirty claws and sharp teeth. 
Trolls are very hard to kill, for they regenerate 3 points of damage each round, unless the damage is from fire or acid. If a troll loses a limb or body part, these parts will attempt to crawl or squirm back toward the main portion of the body to reattach. A troll can reattach a severed member instantly by holding it to the stump. Due to this powerful ability to regenerate, trolls cannot be permanently destroyed except by fire or acid. If a troll is damaged enough to be killed (reaches 0 or fewer hit points) the troll will continue to regenerate and stand again to fight when it regenerates to 1 or more hp. When confronted by fire or acid, a troll’s morale drops to 0.
Each troll gang will be led by a champion with AC6, 7+3 Hit Dice, and 51 hit points. A troll lair or village will be led a chieftain with AC8, 10+6 Hit Dice, 63 hit points, and a +2 bonus to damage rolls with its natural attacks. As long as the chieftain is alive, the trolls will gain a +1 to morale rolls.  Troll lairs and villages will have female and young trolls equal to 100% the number of males in the lair each. Female trolls fight as ogres, while young trolls fight as orcs. 
When trolls are encountered in a village, certain additional creatures will be present. The chieftain will be accompanied by a sub-chieftain and 1d4 bodyguards. These will have AC7, 8+3 Hit Dice, 45 hit points, and a +2 bonus to damage rolls with their natural attacks. In addition, a troll village has a 50% chance of a shaman being present, and a 25% chance of a witch doctor. A shaman is equivalent to a champion statistically, but has Clerical abilities at level 1d4.  A witch doctor is equivalent to a champion, but with Mage abilities of level 1d2. 

Tyrannosaurus Rex
% In Lair:	None
Dungeon Enc:	None
Wilderness Enc:	Solitary (1)
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	120’ (40’)
Armor Class:	6
Hit Dice:		20
Attacks:		1 (bite)
Damage:	6d6
Save:		F10
Morale:		+3
Treasure Type:	None
XP:		2,800
This large prehistoric carnivorous dinosaur is a fearsome predator. It is bipedal and can reach heights of 20’. It will hunt any creature that moves, but generally does not bother with prey smaller than a dwarf.

Unicorn
% In Lair:	5%
Dungeon Enc:	Grace (1d6) / Sanctum (1d8)
Wilderness Enc:	Blessing (1d8) / Sanctum (1d8)
Alignment:	Lawful
Movement:	240’ (80’)
Armor Class:	7
Hit Dice:		4*
Attacks:		3 (2 hooves, horn)
Damage:	1d8/1d8/1d8
Save:		F8
Morale:		-1
Treasure Type:	D
XP:		135
All unicorns are characterized by their snow white coat and long, straight horns growing from the center of their foreheads. Their bright, intelligent eyes are deep sea-blue, violet, brown, or fiery gold. Males sport a short, white beard. A typical adult unicorn is the size of a wild horse. Three times per day a unicorn can cast cure light wounds by a touch of its horn. Once per day a unicorn can transport itself and its rider, as per the spell dimension door, up to 360’. Only lawful, virtuous maidens may approach these shy creatures.  Unicorns can carry up to 30 stone (300lb) and move at full movement, or can carry a maximum of 60 stone (600lb) at half movement.

Vampire
% In Lair:	25%
Dungeon Enc:	Coterie (1d4) / Sanctum (1d6)
Wilderness Enc:	Coven (1d6) / Sanctum (1d6)
Alignment:	Chaotic
Movement:	120’ (40’)
	Fly:	180’ (60’)
Armor Class:	7
Hit Dice:		7 to 9****
Attacks:		1 (touch, see below)
Damage:	1d10, energy drain
Save:		F7 to F9
Morale:		+3
Treasure Type:	Q
XP:		1,840/2,600/3,100
The vampire is one of the most dreaded undead monsters. Like all undead, they are immune to poison and charm, hold, and sleep spells. Further, electricity and cold do only half damage, they are unaffected by normal weapons, and they regenerate 3 hit points per round. However, vampires must take refuge in a coffin or other sanctum during the daylight hours, and must slumber on soil from their own grave once per month to maintain their powers’ vitality.
Vampires are immensely strong, and deal great blows that inflict 1d10 points of damage. These blows (or any other touch) energy drain the victim of two levels of experience. 
Vampires have the innate ability to take gaseous form at will and to shape change at will into either a dire wolf or a giant bat. They can summon 1d10 bat swarms or rat swarms when underground, or 3d6 wolves or 2d4 dire wolves when above. Any summoned creatures will arrive in 2d6 rounds. In addition, a vampire has a charming gaze (as the charm person spell) that takes effect if a victim peers into a vampire’s eyes. The victim may attempt a saving throw versus Spells with a penalty of -2. 
Vampires will draw back from a lawful holy symbol, a mirror, or garlic if they are presented with confidence. Garlic causes a vampire to cringe for 1d4 rounds, and a holy symbol or mirror will cause a vampire to take a position in which the item does not impede his or her progress or attack. A lawful holy symbol will affect a vampire no matter what its ethos was in life, and holy water will inflict 1d6+1 points of damage. Once a person becomes a vampire, he or she is a chaotic undead creature. 
Reducing a vampire to zero hit points does not destroy the creature; it merely forces the vampire into its gaseous form. A gaseous vampire will reform with full hit points after resting in its coffin for 8 hours. Even if all its coffins are broken, the vampire will not be destroyed, though it will not able to reform until a minion builds a new coffin for it. 
There are only a few means by which a vampire may be truly destroyed. First, vampires may be killed in 1 turn by immersion in running water. Second, if caught in sunlight, a vampire will be completely turned to dust unless it succeeds in a saving throw versus Death each round it suffers exposure. Finally, a stake through the heart, coupled with decapitation, will destroy a vampire. If a vampire is staked without decapitation, he will appear to die, but he will be able to revive if the stake is removed. 
Vampires create others of their kind by draining humans or other humanoids of all life energy.  A character slain by a vampire will return from death as a vampire after 3 days. He will be a slave to the vampire that created him, but becomes free willed if the master is killed.

Varmint, Giant
			Ferret				Rat
% In Lair:		25%				10%
Dungeon Enc:		Pack (1d8) / Den (1d12)		Pack (3d6) / Den (3d10)
Wilderness Enc:		Fesnying (1d8) / Den (1d12)	Horde (3d10) / Den (3d10)
Alignment: 		Neutral	       	     		Neutral
Movement:		150’ (50’)			120’ (40’)
Swim:			-    				60’ (20’)
Armor Class:		4				2
Hit Dice:		1+1				1d4 hit points
Attacks:		1 (bite)			1 (bite)
Damage:			1d8				1d3, disease
Save:			F1				F1
Morale:			0				0
Treasure Type:		A				A
XP:	 		15				5

			Shrew				Weasel
% In Lair:		40%				25%	
Dungeon Enc:		Pack (1d4), Den (1d8)		Pack (1d4) / Den (1d6)
Wilderness Enc:		Drove (1d8) / Den (1d8)		Sneak (1d6) / Den (1d6)
Alignment: 		Neutral	      	  		Neutral
Movement:		180’ (60’)			150’ (50’)
Swim:			-    				-
Armor Class:		5				2
Hit Dice:		1				4+4*
Attacks:		2 (bite)			1 (bite)
Damage:			1d6/1d6				2d4	
Save:			F1				F3
Morale:			+2				0
Treasure Type:		A				I
XP:	 		10				215
Giant Ferrets: These nasty-tempered creatures are much like their smaller kin, but average 4’ long. They are often trained to hunt giant vermin, but their temperamental personalities make them dangerous, and they occasionally turn on their masters.
Giant Rats: Giant rats are omnivorous rodents that thrive on human trash on the fringes of dwellings.  The smallest are 3’ long, but rodents of unusually large size are not unknown. Giant rats are disease carriers, and any time a character is bitten by a giant rat there is a 5% chance the character contracts a disease. A saving throw versus Poison is permitted, and should it fail the character dies of the disease 1d6 days later. A successful saving throw indicates that the character gets ill and is bedridden for 30 days, but the disease does not prove fatal. The spell cure disease will cure this infection. Rats fear fire, and must make a morale roll if burned with torches or oil. They are adept swimmers, who are at home in sewers, water-filled caverns, and marshes.
Giant Shrews: Giant shrews are rodents that in some ways resemble giant rats with slightly longer snouts. They are burrowing animals, with reduced eyesight, but able to echolocate in a fashion not unlike bats, by emitting small squeaks. With this kind of “vision” they are able to see 60’, though this may be blocked with the spell silence 15’ radius. A deafened (and thus blinded) giant shrew has an effective AC of 1 and suffers a -4 penalty to attack throws. Giant shrews are insectivores, and are highly territorial. They will attack trespassers, and are extremely fast. They automatically have initiative on the first round of combat, and have a bonus of +1 on the second round. They can jump up to 5’.
Giant Weasels: These 9’ long creatures are brown, tan, or white. They are fierce hunters, and when they successfully attack with their bite they cling to the victim, sucking blood for 2d4 points of damage each round. Once they bite they cannot be removed, and will cling until either the victim has died or the weasel has been killed. Giant weasels can see in the dark with a limited 30’ infravision, and have a very keen sense of smell that they use to track prey. These burrowing creatures live in the tunnels they create in the earth, and will sometimes venture or burrow into dungeons. 

Whale
			Killer				Narwhal				Sperm
% In Lair:		None				None				None
Dungeon Enc:		None				None				None
Wilderness Enc:		Pod (1d6)			Pod (1d4)			Pod (1d3)
Alignment: 		Neutral				Lawful				Neutral
Movement:		240’ (80’)			180’ (60’)			180’ (60’)
Armor Class:		3    				2    				3
Hit Dice:		6*				12 				36*
Attacks:		1 (bite)			2 (bite, horn)			1 (bite)
Damage:			1d20				2d6/1d8	 			3d20
Save:			F3				F12				F15
Morale:			+2				0				-1
Treasure Type:		M				Special				P
XP:	 		570				1,200				12,500
Killer Whale: These immense whales typically reach a length of 25’. They prefer colder waters of the north or extreme south. They prey on many different animals of the sea. Killer whales are able to swallow whole creatures of man size or smaller on an unmodified attack throw of 20. A creature that is swallowed suffers 1d6 points of damage each round, and drowns after 10 rounds. The damage stops when either the creature dies or the whale is killed. If the swallowed creature has a sharp weapon, it may attack the whale from inside its belly with an attack penalty of -4. Should a swallowed creature die and and remain the whale’s belly for 6 turns, it is irrecoverably digested. Because of their propensity to swallow creatures whole, an encounter with killer whales may yield treasure even though the creature has no lair.  The treasure (if any) is always found inside the creatures’ bellies.
Narwhal: These large whales typically reach a length of 15’. They prefer colder waters of the north or extreme south. They are highly intelligent and have a magic horn on their heads that resembles the horn of a unicorn. Some say that this horn, even when severed, will vibrate in the vicinity of chaotic or evilly intentioned creatures. Even if this rumor is false, the horns are valuable for their ivory, fetching 1d6x1,000gp. 
Sperm Whale: These gigantic whales typically reach a length of 60’. Sperm whales are able to swallow whole creatures of man size or smaller on an attack throw at least 4 higher than the target value, and on any unmodified attack throw of 20. A creature that is swallowed suffers 3d6 points of damage each round, and drowns after 10 rounds. The damage stops when either the creature dies or the whale is killed. If the swallowed creature has a sharp weapon, it may attack the whale from inside its belly with an attack penalty of -4. Should a swallowed creature die and remain in the whale’s belly for 6 turns, it is irrecoverably digested. When a sperm whale encounters a sea vessel, it usually (90%) leaves it undisturbed, but may decide to attack. A sperm whale can slam into a ship with its immense head, dealing 6d6 structural points of damage. Because of their propensity to swallow creatures whole, an encounter with sperm whales may yield treasure even though the creature has no lair.  The treasure (if any) is always found inside the creatures’ bellies.

Wight
% In Lair:	70%
Dungeon Enc:	Throng (1d6) / Barrow (1d8)
Wilderness Enc:	Horde (1d8) / Barrow (1d8)
Alignment:	Chaotic
Movement:	90’ (30’)
Armor Class:	4
Hit Dice:		3**
Attacks:		1
Damage:	Energy drain
Save:		F3
Morale:		+4
Treasure Type:	H
XP:		80
Wights are undead creatures who were formerly humans or demi-humans in life. A wight’s appearance is a weird and twisted reflection of the form it had in life. Wights attack by touching a victim and energy draining one level from the victim. Any human or demi-human slain by a wight becomes a wight in 1d4 days. Wights may only be harmed by magical weapons, spells, and weapons made of silver. Like other undead, they are immune to the effects of sleep, charm, and hold spells.

Wolf
			Ordinary Wolf				Dire Wolf
% In Lair:		10%	 				10%  
Dungeon Enc:		Pack (2d6) / Den (3d6)			Pack (1d4) / Den (2d4)
Wilderness Enc:		Route (3d6) / Den (3d6)			Route (2d4) / Den (2d4)
Alignment: 		Neutral	      	  			Neutral
Movement:		180’ (60’)				150’ (50’)
Armor Class:		2    					3
Hit Dice:		2 + 2					4 + 1
Attacks:		1 (bite)				1 (bite)
Damage:			1d6					2d4
Save:			F1					F2
Morale:			0					0
Treasure Type:		None					None
XP:	 		35					140
Ordinary Wolves: Wolves are carnivorous pack hunters known for their persistence and cunning. Wolves primarily hunt and live in wilderness settings, but occasionally venture into caverns and dungeons. Wolves are social, and when their numbers are greater they are more confident. In a group of 3 or fewer, or if 50% of their number has been lost, their morale drops to -1.  When a wolf den is encountered, there is a 50% chance that 1d4 cubs are present. Wolf cubs may be kept and trained in the same manner as dogs.
Dire Wolves: These large cousins of ordinary wolves are both more intelligent and more vicious. They normally live in wooded and mountainous areas, but are even more likely than ordinary wolves to venture into caverns or dungeons in search of prey. When a dire wolf den is encountered, there is a 50% chance that 1d4 cubs are present. Dire wolf cubs may be kept and trained in the same manner as dogs, but are more difficult to control. Goblins capture cubs to train them as mounts.

Wraith
% In Lair:	25%
Dungeon Enc:	Throng (1d4) / Haunt (1d6)
Wilderness Enc:	Horde (1d6) / Haunt (1d6)
Alignment:	Chaotic
Movement:	120’ (40’)
	Fly:	240’ (80’)
Armor Class:	6
Hit Dice:		4**
Attacks:		1 (touch)
Damage:	1d6, energy drain
Save:		F4
Morale:		+4
Treasure Type:	H
XP:		190
Wraiths are incorporeal undead creatures born of evil and darkness. In some cases, the grim silhouette of a wraith might appear armored or outfitted with weapons. This appearance does not affect the creature’s AC or combat abilities, but only reflects the shape it had in life. Like other undead, wraiths are unaffected by sleep, hold, or charm spells. They take no damage from non-magical weapons of wood, bronze, or iron, but take half damage from silver weapons and full damage from magical weapons. When a wraith touches a victim it inflicts 1d6 points of damage and energy drains one level. Characters reduced to level 0 are slain. Characters slain by a wraith become a wraith in 24 hours. The new wraith is under the command of the wraith that killed him.

Wyvern
% In Lair:	30%
Dungeon Enc:	Flight (1d2) / Aerie (1d6)
Wilderness Enc:	Wing (1d6) / Aerie (1d6)
Alignment:	Chaotic
Movement:	90’ (30’)
	Fly:	240’ (80’)
Armor Class:	6
Hit Dice:		7**
Attacks:		2 (bite, sting or 2 talons)
Damage:	2d8/2d8, poison or 2d8/2d8
Save:		F4
Morale:		+1
Treasure Type:	M
XP:		1,140
A distant cousin to the dragons, the wyvern is a huge flying lizard with a pair of a talons and a poisonous stinger in its tail. A wyvern’s body is 15’ long, and its scaly body is dark brown to gray. A wyvern on the ground attacks with a bite, and it is able to sting with its flexible, long tail at the same time. Any creature struck with the stinger will instantly die unless a successful saving throw versus Poison is made.
A flying wyvern can attack with bite and tail, or make a dive attack with its talons, dealing double damage. If a wyvern hits a creature smaller than itself with both its talons, the wyvern grabs the creature struck unless it makes a saving throw versus Paralysis. Grabbed creatures of man size or less can be carried off.  
When a wyvern aerie is encountered, there is a 50% probability that 1d6 eggs or 1d4 young are present. If eggs or young are captured, they can be trained as mounts. Wyverns fight to the death to defend their aerie. Wyverns can carry up to 30 stone (300lb) and move at full movement, or can carry a maximum of 60 stone (600lb) at half movement. 

Yellow Mold
% In Lair:	None
Dungeon Enc:	Culture (1d4)
Wilderness Enc:	Colony (1d8)
Alignment:	Neutral
Movement:	0
Armor Class:	N/A (always hit)
Hit Dice:		2**
Attacks:		Spores
Damage:	1d6, special
Save:		F2
Morale:		N/A
Treasure Type:	None
XP:		38
Yellow mold typically covers an area of 10 square feet. It does not move or attack, but if it is touched, it is acidic and destroys leather and wood. It deals 1d6 points of damage to bare flesh. There is a 50% probability that any time yellow mold is contacted, it ejects spores into a 10’ cube area. Any creature inside the area is required to roll a saving throw versus Poison, and failure indicates suffocation and death in 6 rounds from the inhaled spores. Yellow mold is impervious to all attacks but fire. A torch can burn mold for 1d4 points of damage per strike, while burning oil and magical fire do normal damage. Sunlight renders yellow mold dormant.

Zombie
% In Lair:	35%
Dungeon Enc:	Throng (2d4) / Abattoir (4d6)
Wilderness Enc:	Horde (4d6) / Abattoir (4d6) 
Alignment:	Chaotic
Movement:	60’ (20’)
Armor Class:	1
Hit Dice:		2*
Attacks:		1 (weapon)
Damage:	1d8 or weapon
Save:		F1
Morale:		N/A
Treasure Type:	None
XP:		29
Zombies are undead corpses reanimated through dark and sinister magic. Because of their utter lack of intelligence, the instructions given to a zombie by its creator must be very simple. The chaotic mages and clerics that create zombies use them to guard locations or valuable treasure. Zombies are susceptible to ordinary weapons, but like other undead they are immune to poison, and charm, hold, and sleep spells. Zombies’ somewhat clumsy, decomposing limbs force them to attack last each round.