Chapter 4: Proficiencies

The Basics of Proficiencies
Proficiencies represent particular areas of expertise that your character has developed due to his background, homeland, and training. Each class has a class list of proficiencies, representing training that is particularly useful to the particular profession. In addition, there is a general list of proficiencies, which represent trade skills and knowledge that is widely available to all. Characters will learn proficiencies from both lists over time.

Starting Proficiencies
All characters begin with the Adventuring proficiency as well as one proficiency chosen from their class list and one proficiency chosen from the general list. Characters with an Intelligence bonus may choose to begin the game knowing one or more additional proficiencies from the general list. The number of additional general proficiencies that may be learned is equal to the Intelligence bonus (+1, +2, or +3).  The player may choose to leave one or more bonus proficiency “slots” open, to be filled during play as circumstances suggest appropriate choices. However, bonus proficiencies from high Intelligence may only be used to select proficiencies from the general list. 
Note that some proficiencies appear on both the general list and the class lists. For example, Performance appears on both the general list and the Bard class list. This is because Performance is both a common trade skill (general list) and training that is useful to bards (class list). 

Gaining Proficiencies
All characters may choose one additional proficiency from the general list at levels 5, 9, and (if maximum level permits) 13. Characters may choose one additional proficiency chosen from their class list each time they complete a full (2-point) saving throw progression. Thus, fighters get a new proficiency from their class list at level 3, 6, 9, and 12; clerics and thieves get a new proficiency from their class list at 4, 8, and 12; and mages get a new proficiency from their class list at 6 and 12. This is summarized on the Proficiencies Gained per Level table, below. Levels exceeding a class’s maximum level are marked with a “-“.
Unless its description says otherwise, a proficiency may only be selected once. If a proficiency can be selected more than once, then the proficiency throw value required for success is reduced by 4 each time the proficiency is selected. Unless otherwise noted, all proficiency throws use 1d20.  
The Judge may impose limitations on the selection of certain proficiencies depending on his campaign or setting. Otherwise, characters may take any proficiency on the appropriate list.  

Classes	      	     Proficiencies Gained per Level (C=class prof., G=general prof.)
		     1     2     3     4     5     6     7     8     9     10    11    12    13    14
Assassin	     C+G   	 C     	     G	   C	       	     C+G   	       C     G	   
Bard		     C+G   	       C     G                 C     G     	       C     G
Blade Dancer	     C+G               C     G                 C     G                 C     G     
Cleric  	     C+G               C     G                 C     G                 C     G     
Dwarven Craftpriest  C+G               C     G                 C     G           -     -     -     -
Dwarven Vaultguard   C+G         C           G     C                 C+G               C     G     -
Elven Nightblade     C+G               C     G                 C     G                 -     -     -
Elven Spellsword     C+G         C           G     C                 C+G         -     -     -     -
Explorer	     C+G         C           G     C                 C+G               C     G     
Fighter              C+G         C           G     C                 C+G               C     G     
Mage		     C+G                     G     C                 G                 C     G     
Thief		     C+G               C     G                 C     G                 C     G       

Proficiency Lists
General Proficiency List: Adventuring, Alchemy, Animal Husbandry, Animal Training, Art, Bargaining, Caving, Collegiate Wizardry, Craft, Diplomacy, Disguise, Endurance, Engineering, Gambling, Healing, Intimidation, Knowledge, Labor, Language, Leadership, Lip Reading, Manual of Arms, Mapping, Military Strategy, Mimicry, Naturalism, Navigation, Performance, Profession, Riding, Seafaring, Seduction, Siege Engineering, Signaling, Survival, Theology, Tracking, Trapping
Assassin Proficiency List: Acrobatics, Alchemy, Alertness, Arcane Dabbling, Blind Fighting, Bribery, Cat Burglary, Climbing, Combat Reflexes, Combat Trickery (disarm, incapacitate), Contortionism, Disguise, Eavesdropping, Fighting Style, Gambling, Intimidation, Mimicry, Precise Shooting, Running, Seduction, Skirmishing, Skulking, Sniping, Swashbuckling, Trap Finding, Weapon Finesse, Weapon Focus
Bard Proficiency List: Acrobatics, Art, Bargaining, Beast Friendship, Combat Trickery (disarm), Command, Diplomacy, Eavesdropping, Elven Bloodline, Fighting Style, Healing, Knowledge, Language, Leadership, Lip Reading, Magical Engineering, Magical Music, Mimicry, Mystic Aura, Performance, Precise Shooting, Prestidigitation, Running, Seduction, Skirmishing, Swashbuckling, Weapon Finesse, Weapon Focus 
Bladedancer Proficiency List: Acrobatics, Apostasy, Battle Magic, Beast Friendship, Combat Reflexes, Combat Trickery (disarm, knock down), Contemplation, Diplomacy, Divine Blessing, Divine Health, Fighting Style, Laying on Hands, Magical Music, Martial Training, Performance, Prestidigitation, Prophecy, Quiet Magic, Righteous Turning, Running, Seduction, Skirmishing, Swashbuckling, Theology, Unflappable Casting, Weapon Finesse, Weapon Focus 
Cleric Proficiency List: Apostasy, Battle Magic, Beast Friendship, Combat Trickery (force back, overrun, sunder), Command, Contemplation, Diplomacy, Divine Blessing, Divine Health, Fighting Style, Healing, Knowledge (history), Laying on Hands, Leadership, Loremastery, Magical Engineering, Martial Training, Prestidigitation, Profession (judge), Prophecy, Quiet Magic, Righteous Turning, Sensing Evil, Sensing Power, Theology, Unflappable Casting, Weapon Focus 
Dwarven Craftpriest Proficiency List: Alchemy, Art, Battle Magic, Caving, Collegiate Wizardry, Contemplation, Craft, Diplomacy, Divine Blessing, Divine Health, Dwarven Brewing, Endurance, Engineering, Fighting Style, Goblin-Slaying, Healing, Illusion Resistance, Knowledge, Laying on Hands, Loremastery, Magical Engineering, Mapping, Performance (chanting), Prestidigitation, Profession (judge), Prophecy, Quiet Magic, Righteous Turning, Sensing Evil, Siege Engineering, Theology, Unflappable Casting, Weapon Focus
Dwarven Vaultguard Proficiency List: Alertness, Berserkergang, Blind Fighting, Caving, Combat Reflexes, Combat Trickery (force back, knock down, overrun, sunder, wrestle), Command, Craft, Dungeon Bashing, Dwarven Brewing, Endurance, Engineering, Fighting Style, Gambling, Goblin-Slaying, Illusion Resistance, Intimidation, Land Surveying, Leadership, Mapping, Manual of Arms, Military Strategy, Mountaineering, Siege Engineering, Weapon Focus 
Elven Nightblade Proficiency List: Alchemy, Alertness, Battle Magic, Beast Friendship, Black Lore, Blind Fighting, Combat Reflexes, Combat Trickery (disarm, incapacitate), Contortionism, Elementalism, Familiar, Fighting Style, Intimidation, Magical Engineering, Mystic Aura, Passing Without Trace, Precise Shooting, Prestidigitation, Quiet Magic, Running, Sensing Power, Skirmishing, Skulking, Sniping, Swashbuckling, Unflappable Casting, Trap Finding, Wakefulness, Weapon Focus, Weapon Finesse
Elven Spellsword Proficiency List: Acrobatics, Alertness, Battle Magic, Beast Friendship, Black Lore, Blind Fighting, Combat Reflexes, Combat Trickery (disarm, knock down), Command, Elementalism, Familiar, Fighting Style, Leadership, Loremastery, Magical Engineering, Magical Music, Mystic Aura, Naturalism, Passing Without Trace, Quiet Magic, Precise Shooting, Prestidigitation, Running, Sensing Power, Skirmishing, Soothsaying, Swashbuckler, Unflappable Casting, Wakefulness, Weapon Focus, Weapon Finesse
Explorer Proficiency List: Alertness, Ambushing, Beast Friendship, Blind Fighting, Climbing, Combat Reflexes, Combat Trickery (disarm, knock down), Eavesdropping, Endurance, Fighting Style, Land Surveying, Mapping, Mountaineering, Naturalism, Navigation, Passing Without Trace, Precise Shooting, Riding, Running, Seafaring, Skirmishing, Sniping, Survival, Swashbuckling, Trapping, Weapon Finesse, Weapon Focus 
Fighter Proficiency List: Acrobatics, Alertness, Berserkergang, Blind Fighting, Combat Reflexes, Combat Trickery (disarm, force back, knock down, overrun, sunder), Command, Dungeon Bashing, Endurance, Fighting Style, Gambling, Intimidation, Leadership, Manual of Arms, Military Strategy, Precise Shooting, Riding, Running, Siege Engineering, Skirmishing, Survival, Swashbuckling, Weapon Finesse, Weapon Focus 
Mage Proficiency List: Alchemy, Battle Magic, Beast Friendship, Black Lore, Collegiate Wizardry, Craft, Diplomacy, Elementalism, Elven Bloodline, Engineering, Familiar, Healing, Illusion Resistance, Knowledge, Language, Loremastery, Magical Engineering, Mapping, Mystic Aura, Naturalism, Quiet Magic, Performance, Prestidigitation, Profession, Sensing Power, Transmogrification, Soothsaying, Unflappable Casting 
Thief Proficiency List: Acrobatics, Alertness, Arcane Dabbling, Blind Fighting, Bribery, Cat Burglary, Combat Reflexes, Combat Trickery (disarm, incapacitate), Contortionism, Diplomacy, Fighting Style, Gambling, Intimidation, Lip Reading, Lockpicking, Mapping, Precise Shooting, Riding, Running, Seafaring, Skirmishing, Skulking, Sniping, Swashbuckling, Trap Finding, Weapon Finesse, Weapon Focus

Proficiency Descriptions
For ease of reference, proficiencies that appear on the general list are marked with (G). Other proficiencies appear only on one or more class lists.
Acrobatics: The character is trained to jump, tumble, somersault, and free-run around obstacles.  The character gains +2 to saving throws where agility would help avoid the situation, such as tilting floors and pit traps. In lieu of moving during a round, the character may attempt a proficiency throw of 20+ to tumble behind an opponent in melee. The proficiency throw required for the tumble is reduced by 1 per level of experience the character possesses. If successful, the character is behind his opponent. The opponent can now attacked with a +2 bonus to the attack throw, and gains no benefit from his shield. Thieves and others eligible to backstab an opponent gain their usual +4 on the attack throw and bonus to damage. Characters with an encumbrance of 6 stone or more may not tumble. Note that elven nightblades automatically begin play with this ability as part of their class. 
Adventuring (G): The character is well-equipped for a life of adventure. He knows how to clean and sharpen weapons, saddle and ride a horse, set up a camp, and search for a secret door. He has a rough idea of the value of common coins, trade goods, gems, and jewelry. All player characters are assumed to have Adventuring for purposes of the proficiency throws of standard adventuring tasks. 
Alchemy (G): The character can identify common alchemical substances, potions, and poisons with a proficiency throw of 11+. If the character takes this proficiency twice, he can work as an apothecary or alchemical assistant. If the character takes this proficiency three times, he is an alchemist himself, as described under Hiring Specialists. 
Alertness: The character gains a +4 bonus on any proficiency throws to hear noises and detect secret doors. With a proficiency throw of 18+ he can notice secret  doors with just casual observation. He gains a +1 bonus to avoid surprise. 
Ambushing: When the character attacks with surprise, he gets a +4 bonus on his attack throws and deals double damage on the attack. This proficiency does not stack with the ability of thieves (or related classes) to backstab.  
Animal Husbandry (G): The character has the ability to treat wounds and diagnose illnesses in animals. A proficiency throw of 11+ enables the character to identify whether a disease is magical or mundane, and if mundane, diagnose it. With clean, sanitary conditions and bed rest, an animal under treatment of the character automatically regains an extra 1d3 hit points perday. If the character selects Animal Husbandry twice, he can neutralize poison or cure disease, or cure light wounds with a proficiency throw of 18+, attempting once per day per animal. If the character selects Animal Husbandry three times, he can neutralize poison, cure disease, or cure serious wounds with a proficiency throw of 14+, once per day per animal, and can cure mortal wounds with a proficiency throw of 18+, once per day per animal. At any one time, a character can treat three animals, plus an additional one each time Animal Husbandry is selected.
Animal Training (G): The character knows how to breed, groom, and train a particular type of animal. The animal can be taught simple tricks or orders. A character who wants to train two or more different animal types must choose this proficiency more than once. A character with proficiency in training an animal may choose a fantastic creature of a similar type with this proficiency. For example, a bear trainer could learn to train owlbears, or a horse trainer learn to train pegasi. Regardless of the type, animals must begin their training while still young. Initial training, which simply makes the animal safe for handling, takes one month. Each additional task or trick taught thereafter takes an additional 1d4 weeks. An animal can be taught a maximum of 2d4 different tasks or tricks. The animal trainer will only learn the animal’s limit when he reaches it. 
Apostasy: The character has learned knowledge forbidden to his order. He may select 4 divine spells not normally available to worshippers of his god and add them to his repertoire. 
Arcane Dabbling: The character may attempt to use wands, staffs, and other magic items only useable by mages. At level 1, the character must make a proficiency throw of 18+ or the attempt backfires. The proficiency throw required reduces by 2 per level, to a minimum of 3+. Note that bards automatically begin play with this ability as part of their class.
Art (G): The character can create a particular type of art (e.g., painting, sculpture, mosaic). The character must choose the type of art at the time he chooses the proficiency. He can spend more proficiency selections to have several types of art proficiencies. The character is considered an apprentice in his field. He can create 10gp per month of artwork, and can identify masterwork items, rare materials, and famous artisans with a proficiency throw of 11+.  If a character selects the same field of art twice, he is considered a journeyman in his trade. He can create 20gp per month of artwork, and supervise up to 3 apprentices, increasing their productivity by 50%. If he selects the same craft three times, he is considered a master of his field. He can create 40gp per month of artwork, and supervise up to 2 journeymen and 4 apprentices, increasing their productivity by 50%. He could work as a specialist in this field of art (as described in the Hiring Specialists section). 

Art Proficiency Progression
Title			Rank (# of times taken)		Gp Earned/Month		Number of Workers Allowed
Apprentice		1    	   	 		10gp			N.A.
Journeyman		2				20gp			3 Apprentices
Master Artist		3				40gp			2 Journeymen, 4 Apprentices

Bargaining (G): The character gets the best deals available for goods, services, and information. Any items the character purchases costs 10% less than the listed price and any items he sells go for 10% more than the listed price. If both the buyer and seller have the Bargaining proficiency, the opposed Bargainers should make reaction rolls. Whichever character scores the higher result gets the discount. A character may select Bargaining multiple times if desired. Each time the proficiency is selected, the character receives a +2 bonus on his reaction roll when negotiating with other bargainers. 
Battle Magic: The character gains a +1 initiative bonus when casting spells. He is considered 2 class levels higher than his actual level of experience for purposes of dispelling magic or penetrating a target’s magic resistance.  
Beast Friendship: The character is well-schooled in the natural world. He can identify plants and fauna with a proficiency throw of 11+, and understands the subtle body language and moods of birds and beasts (though they may not understand the character). He gains +2 to all reaction rolls when encountering normal animals, and can take animals as henchmen.
Berserkergang: The character may enter a berserker rage. While enraged, he gains a +2 bonus to attack throws and becomes immune to fear. However, the character has a -2 penalty to AC and cannot retreat from combat. Once it has begun, a berserker rage cannot be ended until combat ends. 
Black Lore: The character has studied the terrible necromancies of ancient sorcerers. He can control undead as a Chaotic cleric of one half his class level. If the character casts spells that require a saving throw versus Death, his targets suffer a -2 penalty on the save. When the character casts necromantic spells (such as animate dead), the spell effects are calculated as if he were two class levels higher than his actual level of experience. He may also conduct necromantic research (see Necromancy in Chapter 7) as if he were two class levels higher than actual.
Blind Fighting: The character can fight a target without being able to see it. Blind Fighting is typically used when the character is in darkness or when the target is outside the range of his sight. A character with this proficiency suffers only a -2 penalty on attack throws when blinded or fighting invisible enemies instead of the base -4 penalty.
Bribery: The character is exceptionally skilled at bribing officials with gifts of money or merchandise. Offering a bribe permits an additional reaction roll during encounters, with the throw modified by the size of the bribe. As a general rule, a bribe equal to one day’s pay for the target provides a +1 bonus, a week’s pay provides a +2 bonus, and a month’s pay provides a +3 bonus. Only one bribe can be attempted per target in any given situation.
Caving (G): The character has learned to keep a map in his head of where he is when exploring underground caves, cavern complexes, and rivers. On a proficiency throw of 11+, the character with this proficiency will be able to automatically know the route he has taken to get where he is, if he was conscious at the time.
Cat Burglary: The thief knows how to deftly move across narrow and precarious surfaces. He may balance on thin ledges or tight ropes by making a proficiency throw to climb walls. If the thief falls while climbing, the player may make a second proficiency throw with a -4 penalty in order to catch himself and prevent any damage.
Climbing: The character can climb cliffs, branchless trees, walls, and other sheer surfaces, without climbing aids, as a thief of his class level.
Collegiate Wizardry (G): The character has received formal magical education from a wizard’s guild. He can automatically identify arcane symbols, spell signatures, trappings, and grimoires of his own order, and can recognize those of other orders or traditions with a proficiency throw of 11+. Rare or esoteric traditions may be harder to recognize (Judge’s discretion). A character may select this proficiency additional times.
Combat Reflexes: True warriors never hesitate in combat. The character gains a +1 bonus to surprise rolls and initiative rolls. This bonus does not apply when casting spells. 
Combat Trickery: The character is a cunning and tricky fighter. Pick a special maneuver from any one of the following: Disarm, Force Back, Incapacitate, Knock Down, Overrun, Sunder, or Wrestle. When the character attempts this special maneuver in combat, the normal penalty for attempting the maneuver is reduced by 2 (e.g. from -4 to -2), and his opponent suffers a -2 penalty to his saving throw to resist the special maneuver. See Special Maneuvers in Chapter 6 for more details. A character may take Combat Trickery multiple times, selecting an additional special maneuver to learn each time. 
Command: The character has mastered the art of command. His authority inspires men to follow him into danger. The character’s henchmen and mercenaries receive a +2 bonus to morale. Morale is explained in Hirelings, Henchmen, Mercenaries, and Specialists. 
Contemplation: The character may enter a meditative trance and re-gain the ability to cast a spell of a level he had previously expended. Contemplation requires one hour (6 turns) of undisturbed meditation. A character may not regain the same level of spell more than once per day through contemplation.
Contortionism: The character is extremely flexible, able to squeeze or fold his body in ways that seem humanly impossible, including squeezing between bars and escaping chains and restraints. He may make a proficiency throw of 18+ each round to escape from bonds or to slip between the bars of a portcullis. 
Craft (G): The character has studied under a guild craftsman, such as an armorer, bowyer, jeweler, leatherworker, smith, shipwright, or weaponsmith. The character is considered an apprentice in his trade. He can manufacture 10gp per month of goods, and can identify masterwork items, rare materials, and famous artisans with a proficiency throw of 11+.  The character must choose the craft at the time he chooses the proficiency. He can spend more proficiency selections to have several types of craft proficiencies. If a character selects the same craft twice, he is considered a journeyman in his trade. He can manufacture 20gp per month of goods, and supervise up to 3 apprentices, increasing their productivity by 50%. If he selects the same craft three times, he is considered a master craftsman. He can manufacture 40gp per month, and supervise up to 2 journeymen and 4 apprentices, increasing their productivity by 50%. He could work as a specialist in this craft (as described in the Hiring Specialists section). Note that dwarven craftpriests automatically begin play with this proficiency at the “journeyman” rank as part of their class.

Craft Proficiency Progression
Title 		  Rank (# of times taken)	Gp Earned/Month		Number of Workers Allowed
Apprentice	  1    	     	   		10gp			N.A.
Journeyman	  2				20gp			3 Apprentices
Master Craftsman  3				40gp			2 Journeymen, 4 Apprentices

Diplomacy (G): The character is smooth tongued and familiar with protocol. He receives a +2 bonus on all reaction rolls when he attempts to parley.
Disguise (G): The character can make someone look like someone else through make-up and clothing. A successful Disguise requires a proficiency throw of 11+. Someone who is intimately familiar with the subject of the disguise may throw 14+ to see through it, adding their Wisdom modifier to their die roll.
Divine Blessing: The character knows how to propitiate the gods and gain their favor. He gains a +2 bonus to all saving throws. 
Divine Health: The character knows how to purify his body and soul. He is immune to all forms of disease, including magical diseases caused by spells, mummies, or lycanthropes. 
Dungeon Bashing: The character is hardened to the heavy lifting and physical labor involved in dungeon exploration. The character receives a +4 bonus on throws to open doors and similar acts of brute strength.
Dwarven Brewing: The character knows the secrets of the famed beer and ale of the dwarves. Because of his familiarity with mixology, he may make a proficiency throw of 11+ to determine the magical properties of a potion or oil on taste. He gains a +4 bonus to proficiency throws to craft alcoholic beverages. 
Eavesdropping: The character can hear noises as a thief of his class level. 
Elementalism: Choose an element (air, earth, fire, water). Spells using this element do +1 damage per die and impose a -2 saving throw penalty on the target. Elementals summoned from this element gain +1 hp per Hit Die. The character’s magic missiles can be considered to be of this element, if he desires. 
Elven Bloodline: The character has the blood of the ageless elves in his ancestry. His lifespan is three times longer than normal for his race, and he shows no signs of aging. He also enjoys the elf’s immunity to paralysis. The character’s ancestry must manifest somehow in his appearance (pointed ears, golden eyes, a strange birthmark, or other unusual trait.) 
Endurance (G): The character is nearly tireless. He does not need to rest every 6 turns. He can force march for one day without penalty, plus one additional day for each point of Constitution bonus.
Engineering (G): The character is skilled in planning, designing, and constructing castles, towers, roads, and so forth. Any character with this skill can evaluate constructions the party is passing through to assess what shape they are in, when and by whom they were built, etc., with a proficiency throw of 11+. Each time this proficiency is taken, the character can supervise 25,000gp worth of permanent construction. A character who has taken this proficiency four times is the equivalent of the engineer specialist described in the Specialists section.
Familiar: The character gains a familiar, a magical animal companion. The familiar will be a creature appropriate to the character’s alignment and other powers (as determined by the Judge). The familiar always has a number of Hit Dice and maximum hit points equal to ½ its master’s own; Intelligence equal to its master’s Intelligence; and a number of general and class proficiencies equal to its masters, selected from its master’s class list. The familiar can always understand any languages spoken by its master, and the character will be able to understand the familiar’s speech, though no one else will without resorting to speak with animals. The familiar is utterly loyal to its master and will fight for him, perform services, and generally obey his commands. While the familiar is within 30’, the character receives +1 on saving throws, but if the familiar is ever killed, the character must save versus Death or instantly take damage equal to the familiar’s maximum total hit points. A character does not gain a new familiar if it is slain until he has gained a level of experience. 
Fighting Style: The character chooses to become proficient in a particular fighting style, such as two weapon fighting or weapon and shield. Because of his familiarity with the fighting style, a proficient character may draw his weapon(s) and/or ready his shield without having to give up an opportunity to move or attack. In addition, each fighting style provides a special bonus when the character is fighting in that style. The fighting styles and their bonuses are listed below. 

Fighting Styles
Style		   Bonus
Pole weapon	   +1 to initiative rolls
Missile weapon	   +1 to attack throws
Single weapon	   +1 to attack throws
Two weapons	   +1 to attack throws
Two-handed weapon  +1 to damage rolls
Weapon and shield  +1 to armor class

Bonuses are in addition to the standard bonuses for fighting in the given manner. For instance, a character with weapon and shield fighting style proficiency gains a total improvement to his AC of 2 points. A character may take this proficiency multiple times, selecting an additional fighting style each time. If a character has two fighting styles that might be applicable in a given fight, he may only apply the bonus for one style in any given round. For example, if a character armed with a spear and a shield has both the pole weapon and weapon and shield fighting style proficiencies, he must choose between +1 initiative rolls or +1 to AC, but not both. 
Gambling (G): The character has the ability to win money in games of skill (competitive card games) and betting. He can earn 1d6gp per month as a professional gambler. The character can select Gambling additional times if desired, increasing his monthly income by 1d6gp with each selection. If multiple characters with Gambling proficiency face each other in a game of skill and betting, they should each roll the appropriate number of d6s as if measuring their monthly gambling income. Whichever gambler rolls the higher total has won the first round (hand, trick, etc.) Losers must either exit the game or increase their bet by rolling the dice again and adding it to the total. This continues until no gambler is willing to increase the bet, at which time the gambler with the highest cumulative total wins the game. The losers must each pay the winner the total amount of their rolls. If all gamblers agree, the game can be for higher stakes. This can be as simple as multiplying the total rolled by 5, 10, or even 1,000+, or as complex as requiring the loser to turn over domains and castles. 
Goblin-Slaying: The character has been trained to ruthlessly cut down his race’s humanoid foes. He receives +1 on attack throws against kobolds, goblins, orcs, gnolls, hobgoblins, bugbears, ogres, trolls, and giants. At level 7, this bonus increases to +2, and at level 13 it increases to +3.
Healing (G): The character is especially skilled at treating wounds and diagnosing illnesses among humans and demi-humans. A proficiency throw of 11+ enables the character to identify whether a disease is magical or mundane, and if mundane, diagnose it. A patient under treatment of Healing naturally heals an extra 1d3 hit points each day. If the character selects Healing twice, he can neutralize poison, cure disease, or cure light wounds with a proficiency throw of 18+, once per day per patient. If the character selects Healing three times, he can neutralize poison, cure disease, or cure serious wounds with a proficiency throw of 14+, once per day per patient. A character with Healing proficiency can use the healing herbs listed in the Equipment chapter (e.g. blackwort, comfrey, goldenrod, and woundwort) to heal additional damage or gain a bonus on his proficiency throws.  In any one day, a character can supervise three different patients, plus an additional one each time Healing is selected.

Healing Proficiency Progression
Title		    Rank (# of times taken)	Gp Earned/Month		Patients/Day	Skills
Healer		    1	       	     		25gp			3		Identify 11+, extra 1d3 hit points per day
Physicker	    2				50gp			4		Identify 7+, neutralize poison, cure disease, cure light 18+
Chirugeon	    3				100gp			5		Identify 3+, neutralize poison, cure disease, cure serious 14+

Illusion Resistance: The character is as hard to fool as the most cynical dwarf. The character receives +4 bonus on saving throws to disbelieve magical illusions.
Intimidation (G): The character knows how to bully others to get what he wants. He receives a +2 bonus on all reaction rolls when implicitly or explicitly threatening violence or dire consequences. The targets must be 5 HD or less, or the character and his allies must outnumber or grossly outrank the targets. 
Knowledge (G): The character has made a specialized study of a particular field, such as architecture, astrology, geography, history, mathematics, metaphysics, natural history, natural philosophy, or political economy. The character can usually make his living by acting as an expert on the subject. With a proficiency throw of 11+, the character can recall expert commentary or information relating to his area of knowledge. The character must choose his area of knowledge at the time he chooses the proficiency. He can spend more proficiency selections to have several different areas of knowledge. If a character selects the same knowledge twice, he is an expert in the subject and can train students and write books on the topic. If he selects the same subject three times, he could work as a sage of the subject (as described in Specialists in Chapter 3). 
Labor (G): The character is highly proficient at a particular type of physical labor, such as bricklaying, farming, mining, or stonecutting. The character can make his living off his labors, earning 3-12gp per month. With a proficiency throw of 11+, the character can interpret information in light of his skill. A character may learn other labor proficiencies by taking this proficiency multiple times. Labor does not require enough skill to be able to be improved by taking this proficiency multiple times.
Land Surveying: The character is an expert at surveying the land around him. With a proficiency throw of 11+, the character can predict dangerous sinkholes, deadfalls, collapses, or rock slides when the character enters the area. In dungeons, an explorer with Land Surveying gains a +4 bonus to his throws to escape detection due to his ability to find the best cover. 
Language (G): This proficiency enables the character to learn to speak, read, and write an additional language (pick one). The character’s level of literacy with the new language is determined by his Intelligence. Characters with an Intelligence of 8 or less are generally illiterate. However, this proficiency can be taken by a character with a low Intelligence (8 or less) in order to become literate in a language the character already speaks. 
Laying on Hands: The character can heal himself or another by laying on hands once per day. The character can restore 2 hit points per experience level. A character may take this proficiency multiple times. Each time it is taken, the character may lay on hands an additional time per day.
Leadership (G): The character is an inspirational authority figure who earns great loyalty. The character may hire one more henchman than his Charisma would otherwise permit, and the base morale score of any domain he rules is increased by 1. Domain morale is explained in the Campaign chapter. 
Lip Reading (G): The character can “overhear” conversations spoken in a language he understands. If the subject of his lip reading is not speaking clearly in bright light, the character may need to make a successful proficiency throw to hear noise in order to determine if he gleans the appropriate information. Characters with Lip Reading proficiency receive a +1 bonus to carousing and spying hijinks. See Hideouts and Hijinks in Chapter 7 for more information on carousing and spying.
Lockpicking: The character is an expert with locks and receives a +2 bonus on proficiency throws to open locks. He may open a lock in one round (rather than one turn) by making a successful proficiency throw to open locks with a -4 penalty.
Loremastery: The character is knowledgeable on a variety of esoteric subjects. At level 1, the character may make a proficiency throw of 18+ to decipher occult runes, remember ancient history, or identify a historic artifact. The proficiency throw required reduces by 1 per level. Note that bards automatically begin play with this proficiency as part of their class.
Magical Engineering: The character has specialized knowledge of magical items. He gains a +1 to magical research throws. He can recognize most common magical items after careful investigation with a proficiency throw of 11+, but is unable to recognize uncommon or unique magical items, to divine command words, to distinguish trapped or cursed items from safe ones, or to assess the specific bonus or number of charges remaining in an item. This proficiency can be selected multiple times, each time adding an additional +1 bonus to magical research throws and reducing the proficiency throw required to recognize common items by 4. 
Magical Music: The character can perform music that can serenade those who are potentially attracted to the character (as a charm person spell) or tame savage beasts (as a sleep spell). The character must succeed on an appropriate Performance proficiency throw to use Magical Music. If successful, the charm or sleep effect begins immediately and lasts until the character stops performing. If the character performs for a full turn (10 minutes), the effect has the duration of the spell. Magical music has no effect if used against creatures that are already in combat. 
Manual of Arms (G): The character has the ability to train soldiers in military discipline, physical fitness, and weapon drill. If the character selects Manual of Arms once, he can earn 30gp per month training light infantry. It takes 1 month to turn raw recruits into light infantry. If the character also selects Riding, he can also train light cavalry (taking 3 months). If he also selects Weapon Focus (bows & crossbows), he can train crossbowmen (1 month), bowmen (2 months), or longbowmen (3 months). Manual of Arms combined with Riding and Weapon Focus (bows & crossbows) allows the character to train horse archers (6 months). If the character selects Manual of Arms twice, he earns 60gp per month and can train heavy infantry (1 month). Two ranks of Manual of Arms combined with Riding allow the character to train heavy cavalry (6 months). Two ranks of Manual of Arms combined with Riding and Weapon Focus (bows & crossbows) allows the character to train cataphract cavalry (12 months). The character can train up to 60 soldiers during each training period. 
Mapping (G): The character can understand and make maps, even if he cannot read or write. With a proficiency throw of 11+, the character can interpret or draft complicated layouts or map an area by memory. This proficiency can be selected multiple times.
Martial Training: As a crusader of the faith, the character has had training that supersedes the normal religious strictures of his order. Select one of the following types of weapons and add these to the list of weapons permitted to the character: (1) axes; (2) bows/crossbows; (3) flails/hammers/maces; (4) swords/daggers; (5) spears/pole arms; (6) bolas/nets/slings/saps/staffs. 
Military Strategy (G): The character has studied the art of war and the methods of the great captains. He can recognize famous historical battles, generals, and weapons with a proficiency throw of 11+. Forces under his command receive a +1 bonus to initiative rolls in mass combat. This proficiency may be selected multiple times, each time adding an additional +1 bonus to mass combat initiative, to a maximum of +3.
Mimicry (G): The character can imitate animal calls and foreign language accents. With a proficiency throw of 11+, the character’s mimicry (e.g. imitating the screech of a hoot owl or a noise from some other animal) is so authentic as to fool listeners into believing they have heard the actual animal.  This proficiency can be selected multiple times.
Mountaineering: The character can use mountaineering gear to climb difficult mountains and cliff faces, and to rig lines to enable non-climbers to tackle those faces as well, as a thief of their class level. This proficiency does not allow the character to climb sheer surfaces during combat or without extensive gear.
Mystic Aura: The character has learned to project his magical powers in a way that causes awe in those that share the character’s presence. He gains a +2 bonus to reaction rolls to impress and intimidate people he encounters. If this bonus results in a total of 12 or more, the subjects act as if charmed while in his presence.
Naturalism (G): The character is knowledgeable of common plant and animal life forms in terrain typical to his background. The character is familiar with edible and poison foods, healing herbs, and signs of unnatural danger (such as unusual quiet, atypical animal behavior, etc.) in his known terrain with a proficiency throw of 11+. This proficiency can be selected multiple times.
Navigation (G): The character can take the position of the sun and stars to determine roughly where he is. He gains a +4 bonus on proficiency throws to avoid getting lost in the wilderness. He can serve as a navigator on a seagoing vessel as described in Specialists.
Passing Without Trace: The character leaves no sign of his passing over wilderness terrain, and may not be tracked. For every 3 levels of experience, the character may cover the tracks of an additional traveling companion.
Performance (G): The character can act, dance, sing, recite poetry, tell stories, or play musical instruments in a skilled manner. The character chooses the type of performance that his character knows, and the character can take the proficiency several times in order to know multiple types of performance. The character is considered an apprentice in his style. He can earn 10gp per month from his performances, and can identify famous performers, masterpieces, and rare instruments with a proficiency throw of 11+.  If a character selects the same type of performance twice, he is considered a journeyman in his trade. He can earn 20gp per month from his performances, and lead a troupe of up to 3 apprentices, increasing their productivity by 50%. If he selects the same type of performance three times, he is considered a master of his field. He can earn 40gp per month from his performances, and lead a troupe of up to 2 journeymen and 4 apprentices, increasing their productivity by 50%. Note that bards automatically begin play with this ability at the apprentice level as part of their class.

Performance Proficiency Progression
Title	    		Rank (# of times taken)		Gp Earned/Month		Number of Workers Allowed
Apprentice  		1	       	     		10gp			N.A.
Journeyman  		2				20gp			3 Apprentices
Master Performer	3				40gp			2 Journeymen, 4 Apprentices

Precise Shooting: The character may conduct missile attacks against opponents engaged in melee at a -4 penalty to his attack throw. A character may take this proficiency multiple times. Each time the proficiency is taken, the penalty to attack opponents in melee is reduced by 2. Characters without this proficiency cannot attack opponents engaged in melee with missile attacks.
Prestidigitation: The character can magically accomplish simple illusions and sleight of hand tricks suitable for impressing peasants, such as lighting a candle or shuffling cards, at will. The character must be able to perform the task physically, and be free to speak and gesture. He may use magical sleight-of-hand to pick pockets as a thief of one half his class level.
Profession (G): The character is highly skilled at a civil profession, such as actuary, banker, chamberlain, judge, lawyer, librarian, merchant, restaurateur, scribe, or seneschal. The character is considered an apprentice in his profession. He can earn 25gp per month for his services, and can make expert commentary on subjects pertaining to his profession with a proficiency throw of 11+. The character must choose the profession at the time he chooses the proficiency. He can spend more proficiency selections to have several types of profession proficiencies. If a character selects the same profession twice, he is considered a licensed practitioner of his profession. He can earn 50gp per month for his services, and supervise up to 3 apprentices, increasing their productivity by 50%. If he selects the same profession three times, he is considered a master of his profession. He can earn 100gp per month, and supervise up to 2 practitioners and 4 apprentices, increasing their productivity by 50%. 

Profession Proficiency Progression
Title	   	       Rank (# of times taken)		Gp Earned/Month		Number of Workers Allowed
Apprentice	       1       	  			25gp			N.A.
Licensed Practitioner  2				50gp			3 Apprentices
Master of Profession   3				100gp			2 Journeymen, 4 Apprentices

Prophecy: The character is subject to premonitions and dreams of the past and future. The Judge will make these visions both cryptic and useful. Once per week, the character can commune (as the spell). 
Quiet Magic: The character can cast spells with minimal words and gestures. A successful proficiency throw to hear noise is required to hear the character cast spells. Full gagging is necessary to prevent the character from working magic. 
Riding (G): The character knows not only the care and feeding of a riding animal, but also how to handle it under difficult circumstances, such as using a weapon from its back. For each type of animal, this proficiency must be selected separately. This proficiency is not required to simply ride a domesticated animal under non-combat conditions.
Righteous Turning: When turning undead, the character adds his Wisdom bonus to both the turning throw and to the number of HD turned on a successful throw. 
Running: The character’s base movement speed is increased by 30’ when wearing chainmail or lighter armor.
Seafaring (G): The character can crew large sailing ships or galleys. If a character selects this proficiency twice, he can serve as a captain on a seagoing vessel, as described in Specialists.  If he selects this proficiency three times, he is a master mariner. When tacking, a master mariner’s ship has its movement rate reduced by only one category rather than by two (as described in the Wilderness Adventures section), and his ship’s chance to evade is increased by +5.
Seduction (G): The character is either naturally alluring or a practiced seducer. He always receives a +2 bonus on reaction rolls with others who are potentially attracted to the character.
Sensing Evil: At will, the character can detect evil (as the spell) up to 60’ away by concentrating. Each use takes a turn.
Sensing Power: The character can detect spellcasters within 60’ and estimate their level of power relative to his own. He can tell when arcane magic has been used within the last 24 hours within the same vicinity. (The character cannot necessarily sense whether an item is magic, unless it has been used in the last 24 hours.) Each use takes a turn.
Siege Engineering (G): The character is highly skilled in the construction and placement of temporary defensive works such as ditches, pits, fields of stakes, and simple wooden and earthen barricades. He also knows how to operate heavy war machines and siege engines such as ballistae, catapults, rams, bores, and siege towers.  If the proficiency is taken a second time, then the character has the knowledge to construct heavy war machines, siege engines, and siege towers as well as use them.
Signaling (G): The character knows how to transmit messages to other signaling specialists of the same military force, culture, trade guild, or other organization. This is similar to learning an additional language. The character must specify the style and culture of signals that he has learned when he takes this proficiency. Examples of signals include naval flags, cavalry trumpets, or smoke signals.
Skirmishing: The character may withdraw or retreat from melee combat without declaring the intention to do so at the start of the melee round. Characters without this proficiency must declare defensive movement before initiative dice are rolled. See Defensive Movement in Chapter 6.
Skulking: The character excels at moving furtively and finding concealment. He receives a +2 bonus on proficiency throws to hide in shadows and move silently. 
Sniping: If otherwise eligible to ambush or backstab his opponent, the character may do so using ranged weapons at up to short range.
Soothsaying: The character is subject to premonitions and dreams of the past and future. The Judge will make these visions both cryptic and useful. Once per week, the character can contact higher plane (as the spell). 
Survival: The character is an expert at hunting small game, gathering fruits and vegetables, and finding water and shelter. The character forages enough food to feed himself automatically, even when on the move, so long as he is in a fairly fertile area. If he is trying to supply more than one person, he must make a proficiency throw (as described in Wilderness Adventures), but gains a +4 bonus on the roll.
Swashbuckling: The character gains a +1 bonus to Armor Class if wearing leather armor or less and able to move freely. At level 7, this bonus increases to +2, and at level 13 the bonus increases to +3.
Theology (G):  The character has received formal religious instruction at a seminary or monastery, and is a member of the church hierarchy.  He can automatically identify religious symbols, spell signatures, trappings, and holy days of his own faith, and can recognize those of other faiths with a proficiency throw of 11+. Rare or occult cults may be harder to recognize (Judge’s discretion). Note that dwarven craftpriests automatically begin play with this ability as part of their class. This proficiency can be selected multiple times.
Trap Finding: The character is an expert trap finder, receiving a +2 bonus on proficiency throws to find and remove traps. He may find a trap in one round (rather than one turn) by making a successful proficiency throw with a -4 penalty.
Tracking (G): The character can follow tracks with a proficiency throw of 11+. The Judge should increase or decrease the chance of success depending on the circumstances: +2 if tracking 2-4 creatures; +4 if tracking 4-8 creatures; +6 if tracking 8-16 creatures; +8 if tracking 17+ creatures; +4 if trail is through soft/muddy ground; -8 if the trail is through hard/rocky ground; -4 for bad lighting; -1 per 12 hours of good weather since trail was made; -4 per hour of rain/snow since trail was made. Characters move at half speed while tracking. 
Transmogrification: The character has mastered grotesque arts of transformation. When the character casts polymorph spells (such as polymorph other), the spell effects are calculated as if he were two class levels higher than his actual level of experience. He may also create magical crossbreeds (see Crossbreeding in Chapter 7) as if he were two class levels higher than actual. Targets of his polymorph other spells suffer a -2 penalty to their saving throw.
Trapping (G): The character can build simple pits, snares, and deadfalls capable of capturing creatures up to the size of an elephant (such as giants, ogres, wyverns, etc). With a proficiency throw of 11+ the snare is built properly. The character can also detect and disable simple wilderness pits, snares, deadfalls, etc., as a thief of his class level. This proficiency provides no abilities with regard to mechanical traps in a dungeon, or magical traps of any sort. 
Unflappable Casting: When the character loses a spell by being interrupted or taking damage during the round, he does not lose his action for the round. While he still loses the spell, he may now move and attack normally. Characters without this proficiency lose the opportunity to act at all if they are interrupted while casting a spell. See Casting Spells in Chapter 5 and Chapter 6. 
Wakefulness: The character requires only four hours of sleep to be rested each night.
Weapon Finesse: When attacking with one-handed melee weapons, the character may use his Dexterity modifier instead of his Strength modifier on his attack throw. 
Weapon Focus: When using a favored type of weapon, the character is capable of devastating strikes. On an attack throw scoring an unmodified 20 when using his favored weapon, the character inflicts double normal damage. A character may take this proficiency multiple times, selecting an additional Weapon Focus each time. The available Weapon Focuses are: axes; maces, flails and hammers; swords and daggers; bows and crossbows; slings and thrown weapons; spears and polearms. Weapon Focus does not allow a character to use weapons not available to his class.

Proficiencies of Normal Humans and Demi-Humans
Normal humans and demi-humans (non-adventuring 0th level characters) do not begin with the Adventuring proficiency or any class proficiencies. Instead they begin their careers with four general proficiencies. If their Intelligence is 13 or greater, they gain additional general proficiencies equal to their Intelligence bonus. A character may not select the same proficiency more than once with his four starting proficiencies, but may use bonus proficiencies from high INT to do so. Normal humans gain an additional general proficiency after 5 years, 15 years, and 35 years of work. Normal dwarves and elves gain an additional general proficiency after 5, 15, 35, and 70 years of work. Adventurers learn much faster – or die. 
EXAMPLE: Tavus is a highly intelligent (INT 16) 0th level young man. He begins his career at age 18 with six general proficiencies – four base + two more from his high INT. He selects Craft (Carpenter), Engineering, Labor (Stonecutting), and Mapping with his four starting proficiencies. With his bonus proficiencies he takes two additional ranks in Engineering. At age 23, he gains an additional proficiency, which he uses to take a fourth rank in Engineering. He is now qualified to serve as an Engineer specialist (see Specialists in Chapter 3), making him among the youngest engineers in his guild. A character of average Intelligence might take a lifetime to gain that same level of proficiency.